Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry and in today ’ s lecture , which is lecture number seventeen , I am going to cover or begin our discussion on ionic chain polymerization .
Now , in this lecture I plan to cover discuss the general characteristics of ionic chain polymerization , and while discussing I will compare how this ionic chain polymerization compares with radical chain polymerization .
And then we will go to cationic chain polymerization and talk about different types of initiation for cationic chain polymerization , and then go to propagation and termination reactions in cationic chain polymerization .
And then I will talk about kinetics of cationic chain polymerization and then energetics of cationic chain polymerization .
And in next lecture , I plan to talk about the other type of ionic polymerization , which is anionic chain polymerization .
Now , let us begin our discussion on ionic chain polymerization .
Now , as the name suggest , in this case the initiation is from an anionic species , whether it is a cation or anion .
Say , if I consider M as a monomer and I is a , initiation , initiator , then it could be a cation or an anion , which will , according to which we name cationic polymerization or anionic polymerization .
It could be acceptance of electron giving rise to a radical anion or removal of an electron , which gives to radical cation , which two of which might combine to give you a dianion or a dication which can further initiate the chain reactions from both the sides .
So , this is example , this is a case of cationic polymerization .
This is a case of cationic polymerization and this two are the case of anionic polymerization .
Now , in this case , the ionic species are the initiator or rather the initiators are ionic species , so as the propagating species also ionic .
Now , the some polymerization , for example , initiation by coordination or semi clock side , which also progress through an ionic species , propagating , propagates through ionic species route , but those we are not going to cover as an ionic chain polymerization .
So , ionic chain polymerization we will consider only when both the initiation and the propagation reaction is by ionic species .
Now , like radical chain polymerization , these ionic chain polymers , polymerization reactions are not very popular commercially .
There are main , too main reasons why they are not so utilized commercially .
One is that stringent requirement of polymerization in case of this ionic polymerization .
We require very , stringest , stringent conditions , which are difficult to achieve in a large industrial scale and also , this ionic polymerization are very selective , which means , that not every monomer can be polymerized by ionic polymerization , unlike , unlike radical case where most of the , poly , monomers , double bond monomers can be polymerized by radical chain polymerization we can assume .
So , these are the main two reasons why this ionic chain polymerization , are not practiced that commercially in that scale .
And so in that sense , it is not that important like radical chain polymerization .
However , this polymerization is ionic chain polymerization , gives us opportunity to synthesize specialized polymers , like block copolymers or tellically polymers , which are basically type polymers , having functional groups at the end of the chain , which we can , we utilized for the , for another reactions .
So , let us start the discussion on ionic polymerization and let us talk about first the general characteristics .
And while talking these general characteristics of ionic polymerization we will compare its differences or its likeliness with the chain , radical chain polymerization .
First is that as I just said , that it is , it is much more selective , much more selective .
Now , why do we started our discussion on chain polymerization ?
We talked about , that this monomers like this ether , which have electron donating group like there oxygen , which can be lone pair , can be donated if it is a cationic centre here .
Now , this type of monomers can be polymerized by cationic chain polymer , polymerization reaction because the resulting cationic propagating can be stabilized by the electron donating , mechanizing donation by the oxygen from here .
Now , for anionics , for anionic chain polymerization we need to have monomers , which have electron withdrawing group , electron withdrawing group , which could be , as we discussed earlier , something like this , acrylates or methacrylates , and , and so on , with this can be polymerized anionically because the resulting anion can be stabilized by this resonating with the carbonyl bond .
So , in that sense , this anionic and cationic polymerization at very and only if the monomer has , monomer with , monomers with , with inductive effect and ability to stabilize the propagating species by resonance in the , both for cationic and anionic , then this monomers can be polymerized by both cationic and anionic .
So , if I write on the , complete this sentence , in that you can able to do , stabilize both cationic and anionic propagating species .
For example , you have styrene where both cationic and anionic can be stabilized by resonance with this aromatic proof or say , cation , resulting cation or anionic can be stabilized by resonance from this double bond .
As we see , we have seen now from this discussion , that not every monomer can be polymerized by anionically and there is a set of polymer , a set of monomers , which can be polymerized anionically .
And you know , less number of monomers can be polymerized cationically , and there are even lesser number polymers , which can be polymerized by both anionic and cationic polymerization .
While in case of radical we have seen , that all this , this monomers or this monomers or this can be all polymerized by radical chain polymerization .
So , in that case , in that composition radical is a , radical chain polymerization is much least sensitive compared to the ionic polymerization .
Now , second characteristics , if you want to talk about , is the effect of polarity , effect of polarity of the solvent .
It is not only polarity , but the capability of the solvent molecules to solvate the ionic species giving the chain propagation .
Now , as you have seen earlier , that a propagation reaction can be this .
It is either cationic species or anionic species .
Now , this anionic species or cationic species , they are not present alone in the medium , they are always associated with or accompanied by a counter ion .
For the positive it is a anion , for negative it is a cation .
So , this propagating chain are always of this ionic group , are always accompanied by a counter ion of oppositely charged , that is always happens .
Now , depending on the association behavior of these two species , the active center and the counter ion , the reactivity of the propagating species varies .
What I mean , that if they are very tightly bound , they are very tight , then obviously , the accessibility of , or the reactivity of this ionic center are less .
So , the propagating species is less reactive .
While if you compare with the situation where they are well separated , they are like free , free hands .
Now , if they are free , then obviously , they are more accessible and the reactivity of this propagating species , ionic propagating species are much more reactive or much more reactive compared to situation when they are tight ion - pair .
So , it is always preferred , that you have a polar solvent , it is , this is always preferred .
We do ionic reaction in a polar solvent because if you have polar solvent , then this oppositely charge ions , ions will be well separated in the medium and if they are well separated , obviously , the reactivity of the active center in the propagating chain will be higher .
So , you have a higher rate of reaction or an eventually higher molecular build up .
Now , often if you use polar solvent , for example if you use hydroxylated solvents , hydroxylated solvents like say , H 2 O or alcohol , what happens ?
This , this reacts , this hydroxylated solvents react very , very fast , you know , very effectively they react with this ionic species and then stop the chain .
So , these ionic centers are destroyed with reaction of this hydroxyl , hydroxy molecules , H 2 O or alcohol .
If you have other polar solvents , like say ketone , what happens ?
This ketone loop complex form complex with this ionic species and then once they form complex , the reactivity of this ionic species are lost .
So , you do not have an effective polymerization happening .
So , you require a polar solvent to have these charges separated and ions as free as possible .
Similarly , if you use very high polar solvents , like hydroxylated solvents or ketone , then the reaction actually gets stopped by reaction of these solvent molecules with the reactive species .
So , eventually or practically , a low to moderate polarity solvents like , say methylene chloride or say , methylene dichloride or THF , or ether or nitrobenzene .
So , these are the examples of some of the solvents , which have , medium , low to medium polarity and does not high react with those ionic species .
They , they actually can be used for ionic species polymerization , but this is , these are not very generic in the sense , that the solvents , this solvents also can react with anionic species as well .
So , we have , we will discuss specifically for the requirement of solvent .
We will talk about cationic and anionic polymerization individually .
Now , how this , if you want to write a , a generic structure of , say , to write , write a cationic propagating species , which have , which a cationic reactive centre and a counter ion , which is represented by A minus , so what are the possible states they can represent ?
One , they can be completely covalent bonding , covalent bonded , covalent bonded , one .
Two , they can be tight ion - pair ; these are very tight , no solvent molecule in between .
So , tight ion - pair or sometimes it is called contact ion - pair or see , some people say intimate ion - pair .
Same thing is called with different names .
It can be present as solvated .
So , solvated has three solvated ion - pair or loose ion - pair or they can be totally free , free ion - pair .
So , these are the possible , depending upon the polarity of the medium this could the four possible association state between these two ionic species .
Now , it , we have given examples of cation and anion here where the propagating species is B plus , is said the both cationic polymerization , the propagating species in cationic polymerization .
But it can be true ; this post can be true for the other anionic polymerization as well .
Now , obviously , with the increase in the polarity of the medium , if you increase the polarity of the medium , this , this , the more polar means , the ions get solvated and then finally , get as free ion , ion - pair .
So , as the reactivity of the ionic centre , obviously , the free is the ionic center it gets , it becomes more reactive .
So , which means and in some cases these , these are not present isolately , they actually remain in equilibrium and equilibrium shifts depending upon the polarity of the medium .
So , in this way you can understand , that solvents play , solvent means , I mean polarity of the solvent plays a very important role in terms of reactivity of these ionic reactions .
And if you compare with radical chain polymerization , solvent polarity actually has no such role to play in case of radical chain polymerization .
You have to only check whether the solvent can solubilize the monomer or the reagent and it , solvent should not participate in the undesired chain transfer reactions .
So , this type of solvent dependent reactivity was absent in case of radical chain polymerization .
So , third characteristic we can talk about and compare the nature of reaction .
Now , this , these are complex reactions as we will find out from further discussion , that these are complex reaction and they are very fast .
They are fast ; they are about , say , 10 to the power 4 to 10 to the power of 6 times of the reaction rate of radical chain polymerization .
So , they are very fast and this fast nature of this reaction is due to the fact , that the accumulation of this active centers .
And as we will immediately discuss , that in case of ionic reaction , this bimolecular , molecular , termination bimolecular termination by reaction between two propagating species is absent or absent because they are anionic charge .
One cation cannot react with another cation , cationic propagating species and terminate the reactions in case of radical .
What you have seen , that radical , two radical propagating species can react with each other and can terminate either by combination or by in case of cationic , anionic polymerization or cation polymerization .
Because they have seen this propagation species are similarly charged , they cannot react with each other and terminate the chains .
As a result , there is a huge increase in the concentration of these active centers in the medium and as a result , the reaction is very fast .
But in case of radicals we have seen , that the steady state concentration of the active radicals is very low and as a result , the propagation was comparatively low in a slower , in compression to these ionic polymerization .
And as these ionic centers are very reactive , they are very sensitive to , very sensitive to impurities , which includes moisture because they are very active , reactive .
These ionic centers are very reactive , they are very sensitive to this impurities where you know , that radical , though radical chain polymerization are sensitive to impurities , but they are not as radical chain polymerization , is not as sensitive as in case of ionic chain polymerization and sometimes large effect of , large effect of cocatalyst .
Cocatalyst are nothing but small inorganic compounds , like say H 2 O , can be observed in case of ionic polymerization have , which was not the case of radical polymerization .
And as the reaction is very fast and complex , this kinetic data , kinetic data are often , often not reproducible because this kinetic data is not always reproducible , especially in this case of kinetics , especially in case of cationic polymerization , cationic , the mechanism and the mechanism on kinetics of this ionic polymerization , especially cationic chain polymerization is still not completely understood , to understand the mechanism in kinetics of this ionic polymerization , especially the cationic one , because as I said , these reactions are very fast and not reproducible .
And as I said earlier , this four is your , the termination reactions .
As I said , that bimolecular termination is not possible , bimolecular termination by the action of two propagating species is not possible and so if you can suppress the other , other reactions , which are chain transfer reaction , if you can suppress those , you can actually keep this chains , this ionic chains as living because you can , because the inherent or intrinsic termination reaction between the propagating species are not there , they are absent .
So , if you can stop the side reactions , which includes the chain transfer reaction , then you can actually make this chain alive or this polymerization could be living polymerization and that is especially true for anionic polymerization .
You will find out in later discussion , that in case of cationic there are other ways , which are likely like chain transfer reactions , but in case of anionic it is comfortably easy to make polymerization , leaving chain polymerization .
Whereas , in case of radical , we know , that this termination can be possible by bimolecular reaction of the two propagating new species .
So , let us now talk in detail about the cationic polymerization .
So , let us talk about and again , like radical polymerization if any chain polymerization , this cationic chain polymerization we were discussing .
So , I should write cationic chain polymerization .
So , it consists of three steps : initiation , propagation and termination .
First , let us talk about different types of initiation reactions , different types of initiation reaction and first one is , which is more common is , by reaction of monomer with an electrophile , say R plus and this electophile could be H plus , which you get it from protonic acids .
Now , if I write generic way , H plus plus A , generic structure of a monomer , it gives you CH 3 CH Y , cationic species , and A minus .
This is counter A minus , is the counter ion .
Now , HX would be strong enough if these acids should be stronger enough to produce significant concentration of the protonal species , so that it can initiate , react with the monomer .
And A minus , the counter ion , should not be heavy , strong nucleophile because if it is a very strong nucleophile , then it can react with the cationic group and make a covalent bond and stop the reaction there itself .
For example , if I consider a case of halogen acids like HX and take the generic structure of the monomer with the reaction , we put on electrophilic reaction , it will form the same initiating species , but because this halogen anion is , is so strong nucleophile , it will actually combine again and form a covalent bond .
So , your reaction stops there .
You cannot have the reaction progressing further .
So , so other protonic acids like H 2 SO 4 or say , HClO 4 or phosphoric acid .
They are used , they can be used because this counter ions are not so strong nucleophile like halide ions , but still this , this , because they are , they are also significantly nucleophilic , this cannot built very high molecular with polymers by cationic chain polymerization .
So , these are limited and the molecular weight , molecular weights are not very high for this proton by this reaction , cationic reaction by this protonation .
So , most , most popular , most important , this electrophilic reaction is reaction of Lewis acids .
So , that is B , with the Lewis acid I can write generic structures like MX n for Lewis acids .
Example could be BF 3 , AlCl 3 , SnCl 4 , SlCl 5 , ZnCl 2 , TiCl 4 , and so on , or they are derivatives , like RaCl 2 , R 2 AlCl and so on .
So , these are Lewis , Lewis acid can be used for supplying an electrophile for reaction with the monomer , but it is this Lewis acids are seldom used alone .
For example , if you take a reaction of isobutylene plus anhydrous BF 3 , anhydrous BF 3 , then there is no reaction .
But at the moment you add little bit of water along with this mix , so you have the same reaction with BF 3 plus H 2 O , then there is a rapid reaction .
So , these examples showing as these Lewis acids , which we just showed in the last page , they are often used along with a second catalyst or cocatalyst , which can be water molecules or some other molecules .
We will just give examples in few minutes .
So , if you consider this case the reaction happens like this .
BF 3 plus H 2 O makes a complex or we can use other Lewis acids and we can use this alkyl halides as a cocatalyst and this case , the complex found is like this .
So , this case , this is a protogen , which is basically proton donor protogen and this is cationogen , which is a cationic species donor or carbocationic , carbocation donor .
Now , this is called nowadays initiator because this is the species , which is supplying the H plus or R plus .
This is coinitiator , coinitiator , BF 3 or AlCl 3 are , sometimes they are called this BF 3 or AlCl 3 , called catalyst and this initiator called cocatalyst .
So , you should be careful about this nomenclature , other you called this as initiator and coinitiator or you called this as catalyst and this is the cocatalyst .
Now , I can write generic reaction for this type of reaction .
Now , once you form this , again react with the monomer and form the initiating species , which let us write in next page .
Similarly , you can write this similar reaction for this aluminum chloride and alkyl halide reaction .
This alkyl halide could be , say for example , R could be tertiary carbon or could be a triphenyl carbon group .
So , this is example of alkyl halide , which is used for this cocatalyst or initiator in this reaction .
So , I , I can write a generic equation or expression , say I , I for the initiator and YZ , this is for your coinitia , I for the coinitiator , this is for the initiator or this for catalyst and this is for the cocatalyst , giving rise to a cationic species and a counter ion .
This is I and which then react with a monomer forming the chain initiating spices .
Now , we are writing ki for this reaction because it has been found out , that of these two reactions , this is the two reactions , consists of chain reaction , chain initiation reaction .
This , this is the step , which is rate determining step .
So , we will consider this reaction while calculating or while determining the , or looking at the kinetics of this chain polymerization .
Remember , if you compare with the radical chain polymerization , this was the first reaction compared to the step , the first step , where radical was getting generated from the initiator molecule and we considered that as a rate determining step for radical chain polymerization .
But in this ionic chain polymerization we , this is the faster reaction step where this is the slower and rate determining step .
So , for ionic reaction monomer also participate in the chain initiation reaction where in case of radical monomer was not actually part of the chain initiating expression Now , the reaction rate also depend , depends on this YZ , which is basically a cocatalyst .
It will also influence the polymerization rate because the activity of the initiation complex depends how readily it can transfer a proton to the monomer and that in turn depends on the acidity of this cocatalyst .
For example , if I consider ionic , cationic polymerization of isobutylene by tin chloride catalyst , then the reactivity of this reaction or the rate of reaction follows Rp , follows in the order like this , nitroethane , nitroethane , phenol , water , which is basically the ranking of the acidity of this cocatalyst .
So , basically the type of cocatalyst also influence the polymerization because the acidity of this , this complex , the activity of this complex depends on how readily it can supply this cationic species , where I say proton or in this case it is a proton or a carbocation to the monomer , and for a proton or protogen or a proton supplier , it depends on the acidity of the cocatalyst .
So , it follows this trend and for the carbon cationic generator like RCl , like AlCl 3 plus , this reaction .
Now , this reaction complex , the , the activity , the total polymerization rate dependence on this RCl is little complex and we will keep the discussion for this course .
So , you should just remember that the , the structure of the cocatalyst also determines the rate of polymerization and also affect the rate of polymerization , and we will now see that .
Obviously , I , the catalyst or the coinitiator also affects the rate of polymerization .
Now , now Lewis , Lewis acid , we are talking about this reaction are the initiation , is by Lewis acids .
So , Lewis acidity of these defined metals increases with atomic number .
We know that Lewis acidity follow this order .
This Lewis acidity of this defined metals increases with the atomic numbers .
So , for a single metal , say , if we consider titanium , then again the Lewis acidity increases with the oxidation number .
So , TiCl 4 have more Lewis acidity compared to , Tl , TiCl 3 than this .
So , for , if you compare with defined , different metal is basically atomic number .
It will determine the Lewis acidity and for same , same metal is the oxidation state increases , the Lewis acidity increases and also the Lewis acidity .
For a single metal follow this trend of the ligand .
If this ligand , they follow this , so obviously , if the ligands are fluorine or chloride , they have much more Lewis acidity compared to the ligands are , this is , this is from your basic knowledge from inorganic chemistry , basic knowledge and this is , from this expression , you know , this is strongest Lewis acid and this is , not always we use this though it is a very strong Lewis acid , for all the cationic reaction .
We will not use this as a catalyst or a coinitiator because rather than other complication if the reaction , it is too fast , then the side reactions also come in the picture , the side reaction also increases .
If the side reaction rate also increases , then again the problem of molecular build up come .
So , though this trend is there , now while choosing the catalyst or the coinitiator , it is , it is not this general trend is always followed , you have to keep the other factors in mind as well .
So , we talked about the initiator reaction with by this reaction of the monomers with the electrophile .
Now , there are other initiation reactions , other initiation reactions , for example , halogen , halogen can be reacting with more acidic Lewis acid and gives out cation , halogen cation .
This can be initiation ; can be done by photo initiation of olium salts .
It can be done by electro initiation where cationic species is formed by electrolysis of any species present in the medium or it can be done by ionic , ionization radiation , like in the case of radical the initiation can be done by ionization .
So , these are the other possible ways of initiating a cationic polymerization .
But as I mentioned in earlier , these are the generic examples , which we get in this page .
These are the most common example of or the most important initiation reaction .
So , we will talk about kinetic .
So , energetic , we will consider this generic initiation step and also consider this initiation step , of , for the discussion because this is the most important of the initiation step we just discussed .
So , let us now discuss the propagation step .
Propagation , we have already seen the different types of initiation possibility and as I said , we will consider the generic case , we , as I showed there .
So , this , this was the initiation reactions .
So , you have this initiator , coinitiator complex , which starts the chain initiation .
I write this in the next page , it can react with the name and start the chain propagation reaction and I can write a generic expression of this in this way plus M kp n plus 1 M plus IZ minus .
If Y is H , the photogens we can write H M n M plus IZ minus .
For examples , that Ba 3 water case , I can write this is a proton donor .
So , I can write… This is the reaction of isobutylene catalysed by this reaction .
I just recall from your earlier decision , I am writing the propagating reactions here .
This , on reacting on with isobutylene , will produce the.. ... So , these are the examples of the propagating steps and sometimes this propagation reaction could be complicated and because of this one two hydride shift , but that is not very common .
I will just give you an example when this propagating steps could be little complicated and by hydride shift or shift and that is applicable for say , propene or one alkene , one alkenes , take example .
Now , this can undergo a hydride shift and from this carbo cation .
So , as a result more complicated products actually form when there is type of hydride shift or some cases methide shift , some cases shift one two methide shift .
If this happens , the reactions become very complicated and we call that sometimes isomerization polymerization as well .
But this is not common ; this is especially applicable to some monomers .
The example we gave , most common propagation steps are in this page , what we just discussed now and as you can realize , that the rate of propagation will depend on the solvents .
We discussed in length the effect of solvent polarity and if the polarity of the solvents is high , then this ion - pair will be more towards a solvated or free ion - pairs , then in the reactivity of this cationic species will be higher .
So , the rate of polymerization will be higher .
Now , let us have , let us see some data related to convince that understanding .
Say , let us take example of styrene , polymerization of styrene by or chloric acid HClO 4 solvent is a mixture of CCl 4 and ethylene dichloride .
This is a dielectric , resulting dilating constant and this is your kp liter mole inverse second inverse .
If you have pure CCl 4 , obviously , this is more non - polar , dielectric constant is 2.3 and the rate is low .
When you increase the polarity by adding ethylene dichloride , dichloethane , EU , say in 40 - 60 mixture , your dielectric constant goes up , your reaction goes up .
If you consider further , 20 , 80 , 7 and this is 3.2 , 3.2 , 0 , 100 , 9.72 and this is 7 .
So , if this is the data to convince you , that if you increase the polarity , which is given by dielectric constant , the rate constant or the rate of the polymerization reaction increases .
So , we just discussed the propagation steps , now let us talk about different possible termination steps in cationic chain polymerization and as one more time , that it cannot , termination does not happen by bimolecular reaction of the propagating species and generally , the termination happens by transfer reactions .
For example , one beta proton transfer to either monomer or counter ion or say polymer itself , solvent or some impurities , which is present or a transfer agent , like the case of chain radical polymerization , we talk about the chain transfer is possible .
And for example , if we consider the beta proton transfer to monomer , I can write k transfer monomer just like the radical polymerization .
If we consider the same examples of isobutylene polymerization by BF 3 and H 2 O , this can transfer beta proton to the monomer and can form this and plus the 2 2 beta proton , one is here and one is this hydrogen .
So , one , depending on which proton is leaving you can get actually two structures with double bond .
If this comes out , then you get a chain end with CH 2 .
If this proton goes out and if something , one of the protons goes out from there , then you get CCH and that is possible , these are possible for other monomers where this is , these two types of double bond is a possibility .
For example , like you have alpha methane styrene in case of , say , example , the monomers like styrene , where you always get only one possible double bond because there is only one possible beta hydrogen to be eliminated .
So , this is very common , this is very important termination process and it could be , this termination could happen to one of the , or any of the other agent as well .
We just gave an example with the monomer and what we will do in the next lecture , we will talk about the other termination possibilities and will discuss the kinetics and the energetics of the cationic polymerization , cationic chain polymerization and then also discuss the characteristics and other features of anionic chain polymerization .
We have been discussing so far the steady state analysis of mass transfer and biochemical reaction in immobilized enzyme reactors .
We have discussed yesterday about the external film diffusion that is in cases where we consider nonporous matrices .
Under steady state condition , the rate of mass transfer can be equated to the rate of biochemical reaction and then by analysis one can come under two extreme conditions ; one under high substrate concentrations we get a Lineweaver Burk profile which is analogous to ordinary soluble enzyme kinetics and in the case of low substrate concentration that is in this case ; low substrate concentration and high substrate concentration you get differences in slopes and the measurement of slope at two distinct stages of Lineweaver Burk plot gives you an estimate of the value of mass transfer coefficient .
You do film diffusion klam can be computed .
Therefore based on the observed reaction velocity in the case of an immobilized enzyme reactor one can determine the value of Sb - Ss that is the substrate concentration gradient and the magnitude of this determines whether the reaction is diffusional limited or otherwise .
If the Sb - Ss is zero or very small quantity then there is no diffusional limitation .
If the magnitude is large or Sb is much , much larger than Ss in that case film diffusion is the dominant player and so the nature of Lineweaver Burk plot under the range of condition of substrate concentration can give you an idea of the mass transfer coefficient .
We are now looking at a general approach to understand the external film diffusion .
We determine by some experimental method or an analytical method or an empirical equation the magnitude of the mass transfer coefficient and the magnitude of mass transfer coefficient will give you the magnitude of the concentration gradient and so another alternative route to estimation of mass transfer coefficient has been from empirical relationship what we call as JD factor .
A JD factor has been defined in the case of heterogeneous catalysis in general and which applies very well to even enzyme catalyzed reaction .
JD factor is defined as a lumped parameter which takes into an account the mass transfer coefficient particularly field diffusion coefficient as well as the reactor operational parameters .
The JD factor is JD factor = ( kL ?
/ G ) ( µ / ?
D ) 2 / 3 This is the … .
number , Nsc .
The first term in the parenthesis represents the mass transfer function ; the other is dimensional number which gives you the operational parameters and here kL is a mass transfer coefficient ; ?
is density , G is the superficial mass velocity and µ is the viscosity ; row is again density and D is the diffusivity .
It has been shown at least empirically in a large number of experimental data that JD is equal to JD = C ( Re ) - n A very general relationship for JD factor has been given that it ’ s a function of Renault number to the power minus n and under different conditions of particle shape and the range of Renault number the magnitude of C and n varies and that can be estimated for a particular system .
A large number of correlations giving the values of C and n have been proposed under different conditions and one of them which needs the actual reaction conditions can be chosen from the literature and used for estimation of JD .
If you look at this one , you will notice that from the estimation of JD factor as a function of C , Renault number to the power minus n one can determine the value of kL .
Because kL will be equal to kL = JD.G / ?
.Nsc 2 / 3 If you convert this magnitude of kL is related to JD factor by JD value and also a combination of the reactor operational parameters ; superficial mass velocity , density and …. .. number .
The magnitude of kL then gives you at steady state , the reaction rate .
That is v ’ = kLam ( Sb - SS ) = rm Under steady state both the biochemical reaction and the mass transfer rate are equal .
This v ’ can be considered as the observed reaction rate which has been monitored experimentally and therefore one can determine the magnitude of Sb - Ss and that determines whether the diffusional control is there or not and accordingly one can design the reactor .
JD can be computed from a variety of correlations as I mentioned .
One of them which have been applied is developed by McCune and Wilhelm .
This is only one of probably a large number of relationships that are reported in the literature of heterogeneous catalysis in chemical engineering .
For spherical particle JD is equal to JD = 1.625 ( NRe ) - 0.507 This is one of the relationships which have been proposed but a large number of such empirical correlations are known .
Once the magnitude of kL is known then one can really incorporate the value of kL into the rate constant of a reactor performance equation .
In most of the practical cases whether it is a plug flow reactor or a CSTR , the error involved in assuming the whole reaction to be under a first order regime or a zero order regime is not very large depending on initial substrate concentration .
For example in the case of CSTR , life is much simpler ; if the fractional conversion desired is very high even at a high initial substrate concentration , the substrate concentration in the reactor will be quite low and that is the substrate concentration which is going in the outlet stream .
So a first order approximation is not something which is invalid and as I mentioned earlier if you take certain data roughly an error of about ten percent in calculation of the space velocity is encountered .
Similarly in the case of PFR , because the enzyme loading is very high usually in PFR , a large fraction of the reactor also experiences a low substrate concentration .
It also experiences high product concentration .
But substrate concentration keeps reducing and towards the end of the reactor , the substrate concentration will be very low and one can assume a first order kinetics .
If you consider a first order case , then the reaction velocity will be v ’ = kf amSS kf I have defined here as a pseudo first order rate constant which is based on surface area ; not volumetric rate constant ; but the surface area based rate constant just to have a dimensional homogeneity with the mass transfer correlation .
kf is equal to a pseudo first order rate constant for enzyme catalyzed reaction which is k ’ 2E0 / K ’ m .
Therefore rate of mass transfer is rm = kLam. ( Sb - SS ) In the case of a non - porous particle the issue is to develop an expression which gives you the substrate concentration at the surface because the reaction will take place at the surface of substrate concentration .
If you equate the two that is v ’ = rm , that will imply that kf amSS = kLam. ( Sb - SS ) Therefore from this substrate concentration on the surface can be calculated as SS = kb.Sb / kf + kL or the observed rate is kL.kf.am.Sb v ’ = kf + kL Then the actual rate constant which incorporates the film diffusion coefficient is this parameter .
kf apparent will be kL.kf.am kappf = kf + kL In your reactor design equation you can incorporate , instead of first order rate constant as this one which is based only on biochemical reaction , this rate expression .
kL can be determined either from experimental data from the Lineweaver Burk plot or from empirical equation of the JD factor .
am is determined experimentally based on the geometry of the particle and kappf can be determined .
kappf can be used to designate the reactor performance of the first order immobilized enzyme reactor with film diffusion limitations or film diffusion control .
Another way again an empirical way to look at the film diffusion has been proposed by Satterfield .
I must here again point out that the whole analysis of the immobilized enzyme reactor has been largely dominated by chemical engineering literature particularly with reference to heterogeneous catalysis because the systems are very identical excepting the thermal , specificity aspects which are attributed to enzymatic reactions but the catalysis part whether it is a heterogeneous catalyst in the case of chemical engineering that means a catalyst supported on a solid matrix .
Even in chemical engineering that is very conventional thing ; only difference is that those catalysts are very , very stable interms of their thermal , operational as well as storage stability where as immobilized enzymes are not as stable .
But all the analysis is identical and Satterfield also provided a single point reactor performance equation based on film diffusion control for heterogeneous catalyst .
He defined a parameter Z as equal to e NRe2 / 3.NSe2 / 3 Y1 Z = ln 1.09 av Y2 Here sigma is voidage as we are familiar ; Renault number and the semite number and av is the ratio of particle surface area to reactor volume and Y1 is the mole fraction of substrate in feed ; Y2 is equal to mole fraction of substrate in the product stream and Z is the length or the height of packed bed required for mass transfer .
That means Z is the height of the length of the packed bed required to transfer the substrate concentration across the film as a function of Renault number and Semite number purely on the basis of mass transfer control ; no biochemical reaction is assumed here .
If the mass transfer has to be incorporated this much of length of the reactor is required under these operational conditions to have the substrate concentration equivalent to biochemical reaction .
That means to make Sb - Ss equal to zero , without any biochemical reaction this much of height of the reactor is required under these operational conditions .
Based on the operational data that means the concentration of substrate in the feed and the product stream as well as the parameters of the reactor operation and the particle size , one can determine the length of the reactor required and if this length of the reactor required is relative to the length of the reactor required for biochemical reaction , if you compare this height required , let us say this is Z1 to that of the height required Z2 based on biochemical reaction if you calculate idealized reactor performance equation and calculate the height of the reactor required and compare the two values that gives you an identification whether film diffusion is controlling or not .
The one which is larger has to be used .
So for example let us say if this Z is much , much smaller than the height required for biochemical reaction then you don ’ t have to worry about diffusion .
You simply design your reactor on the basis of biochemical reaction and be happy .
On the other hand if this height required is reasonably high then you forget about biochemical reactions and design the reactor based on diffusional requirements based on the mass transfer coefficients .
This is the height of the reactor .
This is basically empirical equation depending upon the reaction operational data the height required for effecting the mass transfer across that film .
Right ; only Z1 ; you don ’ t bother about Z2 .
You then don ’ t have to bother about the biochemical reaction because in that height reaction would have already taken place .
Yes . Exactly what we are assuming here is that there is no reaction within the pores of the particle .
All the enzymes are present on the surface and in the thin film there is no reaction taking place .
You must appreciate the difference between the internal pore diffusion and external film diffusion while in the case of internal pore diffusion during the transport of the substrate in the particle reaction is also taking place whereas here there is no reaction taking place along with the mass transfer ; its only mass transfer .
Only difference is that between the bulk and the surface where the reaction is taking place there is concentration gradient and ideally if the diffusion control has to be out of picture in that case the concentration gradient should not be large and this concentration can be reached if you assume that there is no substrate consumption at the surface .
Normally what is happening is that this substrate is getting transported from bulk to the surface and at the surface reaction is taking place .
If suppose there is no reaction taking place then along the length of the reactor at Z the substrate concentration will reach to Sb same as in bulk .
It will take some time whereas if the biochemical reaction is also taking place at the substrate then that length required will be given by Z2 at substrate concentration Ss .
One of the two , which is larger , is required to be considered .
This is what we were talking about the external film diffusion and the other part of the whole story of the steady state analysis is related to internal pore diffusion .
In the case of porous matrices a very large quantity of fraction of total enzyme which is immobilized is within the pores of the particle .
The quantity of enzyme immobilized on the surface is in fact very , very small compared to total surface area in which the whole enzyme is distributed inside the pores of the reactor .
Therefore it will become very important that we look at the concentration of substrate available for the enzymatic reaction within the pores of the reaction .
Very broadly the effect of internal pore diffusion in a very simplistic way is described for isothermal reaction incorporated in the pore diffusional effects by k ’ 2E0Ss v ’ = ?
K ’ m + Ss I mentioned Ss that means I am excluding the film diffusion .
Whatever concentration of substrate that has reached at the surface from there to the pores of the particle we are considering .
We will consider the case where the two parameters or rather all the three biochemical reaction , external film diffusion and internal pore diffusion are taking place .
But at the moment we are talking only of biochemical reaction and internal pore diffusion assuming that the transport through a film is fast enough and it does not create any problem .
That means there is no concentration gradient across the film .
In this case this is defined by a factor ?
which is called as effectiveness factor .
This effectiveness factor is the ratio of the rate of actual reaction in the matrix divided by the maximum reaction rate obtainable if there was no pore diffusional resistance .
That means a very physical conceptual picture of effectiveness factor can be considered .
That is if for example you take a particle let us say of one millimeter diameter ; determine the reaction rate and then also take a particle let us say of ten microns or twenty microns diameter in which we assume that the pore length is very , very small .
Even if the diffusional rate is very slow the substrate can reach to all parts of the enzyme go down to as low as possible and the ratio of the two that means the maximum reaction rate which you can get when you go down in the particle size to that of the reaction rate which is obtained by a particular particle size is defined as the effectiveness factor .
If you consider a very hypothetical condition a single pore as a part of the matrix .
This is surface ; this is thin film .
You have Sb here ; you reached Ss ; there is no substrate concentration gradient but then here onwards there is a gradient .
There are two things you must appreciate in contrast to the film diffusional effects .
One is that there is a rate of diffusion ; the substrate will take some time to reach to the different sites of the enzyme present in the pores .
The other is the substrate is also getting consumed during the reaction .
So therefore if suppose the bulk substrate concentration is itself very low there is likely hood that by the time the substrate reaches to the inside pores , center of the particle there is no substrate present and reaction cannot take place even if enzyme is there .
Ultimately when you will measure the enzyme activity you will see that the enzyme activity is low because per unit enzyme loading the activity which will be expressed by the immobilized enzyme particle will be lower .
So therefore if particle size is reduced you get an advantage that the fraction of the total particle which is receiving the substrate increases coming to one when the particle size is too small and usually in most cases as per the experimental experiences that a particle size about thirty microns in most cases of the biochemical reactions has been considered to give you an effectiveness factor of one .
You will see from this relationship that maximum effectiveness factor can be one because that means the you have a enzyme reaction rate under the condition when the whole enzyme particle is flooded with the substrate , the same substrate concentration what is present at surface is present across the particle , at all surface at all the pores and under that condition the effectiveness factor will be one .
That is what is the ultimate limit and the internal pore diffusion effects are described by effectiveness factor .
There is very tricky situation ; in many cases people have also reported effectiveness factor exceeding unity ; experimental observations .
You measure the enzyme activity lets say for example for different particle size in a reactor and the effectiveness factor works out to be more than one .
Under what conditions the effectiveness factor should be more than one ?
The first condition will be the enzyme kinetics where substrate inhibition is very strong .
The enzymes that are very strongly substrate inhibited may show an effectiveness factor greater than one because the reaction rate when the substrate concentration drops becomes higher than at the surface .
If the substrate concentration is high at the surface the reaction rate is low .
When the concentration goes down , reaction rate increases and therefore the effectiveness factor is one .
The other alternative case of the effectiveness factor exceeding unity is that of a case where we experience partitioning effects particularly … .
pH . If suppose the product of the reaction provides you a change in the micro environment ; let us say hydrogen ions are produced .
Take a typical example of alcohol dehydrogenase .
The reaction product ends up in hydrogen ions ; there will be a pH change and that pH change enhances the enzyme activity .
Then also we will notice the effectiveness factor to be greater than one .
So there are two extreme cases where effectiveness factor show discrepancy from the theoretical understanding .
In the case of strongly substrate inhibited enzymes , if the concentration of substrate at the surface is high then for substrate inhibited reaction , the reaction rate will be low and because of the pore diffusional parameter the substrate concentration across the pores is reducing .
As we saw here the substrate concentration goes down along the pores and substrate concentration going down means the react rate of reaction increases .
When you take the whole particle in account then the bulk of the particle experiencing lower substrate concentration means higher reaction velocity and so therefore this ratio will become more than one or in other words if you take two particles one of larger diameter other is smaller diameter the reaction rate in the larger particle may be more than in the smaller particle .
That is what it means by effectiveness factor of one and in many cases of substrate inhibitor systems this is a usual pattern which is noticed .
No . When there is a partitioning of hydrogen ions and the conditions are such that the rate of reaction as a result of partitioning increases that is the condition .
If the partitioning creates unfavorable conditions for the reaction then it will not be more than one .
Only when the hydrogen ions are produced and the micro environment created by the reaction in the form of product .
No . The comparison will be only when we take the same reaction and in reactor performance equation in addition to internal pore diffusion you also consider partitioning effects .
Then you cannot really compare the two only by a steady state analysis or mass transfer and biochemical reaction .
You must incorporate partitioning effects also in the steady state analysis .
Then only you can compare .
At the moment we are talking only of mass transfer and biochemical reaction .
Partitioning also can be incorporated and which can give you a real performance .
In the case of internal pore diffusion a steady state analysis can be made .
In a simplistic way we consider a pore to be a single cylindrical catalyzed pore .
We assume in a very simplistic way that the enzyme is taking place in a cylindrical pore .
Consider a small differential element in this pore and along which the mass balance can be made .
This is Ss , the substrate concentration on the surface and this goes down across the pore .
This is dx the length of differential element .
If you make a mass balance across this differential element at steady state you see the output of the substrate will be –pR2.D ( ds / dx ) out .
R is the radius of the pore .
dS / dx is negative and this is output of the substrate from the pore .
Input is pR2.D ( ds / dx ) in .
The conversion as a result of biochemical reaction is v ’ ( 2pR ) dx .
At steady state : –pR2.D ( ds / dx ) out + pR2.D ( ds / dx ) in + v ’ ( 2pR ) dx This should be equal to zero as at steady state we make a mass balance of substrate across the differential element we get this .
I must again here remind one thing ; this reaction velocity is based on surface area and not volumetric reaction velocity as we are usually used to in the case of soluble enzymes .
v ’ is based on surface area unlike in the case of soluble enzyme where we usually represent based on the volumetric reaction velocity and that ’ s why we have multiplied by 2pR .
If you rearrange you get ( ds / dx ) out - ( ds / dx ) in 2 - .v ’ = 0 dx RD If you take limit dx tends to zero you can write simply as the second order differential equation d2s / dx2 – 2 / DR .
v ’ = 0 This gives you a generalized second order differential equation which can be set for internal pore diffusion cum biochemical reaction .
Here you can make modification ; if you transfer the reaction velocity in the volumetric form like for example kV = kS.S These are the two rate constants ; zero order or first order based on volumetric and surface area and in that case for a cylindrical pore the k will be equal to k = kS.S / v = 2kS / R Therefore one can write here as d2s / dx2 – v ’ = 0 as the basic second order differential equation a solution of which can give you if you substitute the reaction rate term here depending on the nature of the reaction either by assuming a first order kinetics or zero order kinetics or even Michaelis Menten kinetics and Michaelis Menten kinetics will require a numerical solution and analytical solution may be difficult and you can get the solution of the substrate concentration as a function of the distance x from the surface .
A solution of this will give you the substrate concentration profile in the pore or inside the particle .
No . Sorry diffusional coefficient will come here .
It is not going .
We have multiplied here too or v / D either way .
This can be written for variety of cases and solved within boundary conditions so as to give you the reactor performance .
I think we will now stop at this point .
Welcome back to this 8 th lecture of this course in Polymer Chemistry .
In today ’ s lecture we planned to cover interfacial polymerization , and we also will be talking about different synthesis of different step polymers in very brief briefly .
And at the end , I planned to just give a summary of this module on step growth polymerization .
And I will be telling you what is my expectation at the end of this module .
Now , let us look at the whatever topic we covered in the last lecture .
In the last lecture we have covered the cyclization verses linear polymerization , what are the conditions which prefer linear polymerization , which are different the preferred ones .
We also discussed various way of making branched and cross linked polymers .
And we also studied in that context that in case of branching reaction going on the molecular build up is higher for a given conversion in comparison to a linear polymerization .
And at the end we discussed the complete list of conditions or the criteria , which one must be maintaining during the polymerization or at the beginning of the polymerization to have a successful step polymerization .
I mean by successful , I mean a building of the molecular weight of the polymer , which is targeted and in most cases it is a high molecular weight polymers .
Now , suppose you have done everything right , whatever instruction is given to you in the this course or in any text book , you have followed everything right .
You have taken monomers in a ratio very close to r is equal to 1 and you have done the reaction at high temperature for longer time , try to take out the condensate for you know as much as possible .
And you have done whatever I have been instructed to you have done that .
In spite of doing that you found that at the end of the reaction your desired polymer has not formed .
That means , you must be expecting a high molecular weight you have got a low molecular weight polymers .
Now , what does it mean it does not mean it all the instruction given to you are incorrect , you have to deep you know look into deep what might have happened .
And I just I will give you few guide line in the deep something goes wrong in spite of doing your best possible way ; now what are the things to look for and let us look one by one .
So , there is a guide line for trouble shooting , now you must be capturing the condensate in a trap will distilling of the condensate byproduct you must be you know must be collecting that in a trap .
Now , you analyze the end of the reaction , you analyze that that material in the trap and see whether you found any monomers in there .
Now , if we find any monomer there , which means that during the polymerization one or more than one monomers has escaped by volatilization .
And that is going to imbalance your monomer ratio , you must have you might have taken one is one ratio or whatever very close to one what is your target molecular weight .
But still , because one of the monomers might have volatile in excess than other , which will imbalance your stoichiometric ratio and which will definitely going to decrease your final molecular weight .
Now , what are the ways you can tackle this , one thing you can do if you find that their monomers are getting volatilized during the reaction .
You can start slowly , which means that you take a you take the reaction and carry out the reaction for some time at a lower temperature and at atmospheric pressure .
And when a reaction has progressed some for some duration and then duration there is a chance that monomers might form dimer or small molecular weight , oligomers .
Then their volatility tendency of volatility would come down as their molecule weight increases increased by this time .
Now , if you apply the vacuum or reduce the pressure , then chances of you know vocalization of the monomers comes down .
So , what you can do in reaction you can do in the steps , you can do the first step in a lower temperature and at higher pressure and then slowly increase the temperature and reduce the pressure .
And at the finally , when your molecular weight the conversion is you know quite high , there are less amount of monomer present in the reaction medium , you ramp the temperature as high as possible , you know and then you reduce the pressure as much as possible .
So , that is the one way you can reduce and the volatility of the vocalization of the monomers .
Second thing you can analyze the product , if the product is colored or if you by analyzing the reaction mixture of the end of the product at the end of the reaction we find there are new molecules .
And specially look for the chain stoppers which are mono functional molecules , if you find them which means it is as a result of degradation or a side reaction there would be either imbalance in the stoichiometry .
Or there would be generation of this mono functional chain stopper , which will which will stop your polymer chains to progress further .
So , that will again reduce the molecular weight build up .
And what you have to do to tackle this you will understand what is going on and understand the chemistry behind this side reaction and then do whatever now your best way to minimize this side reaction unwanted reactions .
And sometimes the catalyst , which you are using in the reaction that might be one source , which might be catalyzing the side reactions as well .
So , you might consider chaining the catalyst or even reducing catalyst amount in the reaction .
So , that your side reactions comes down as low as possible , one side reactions we can consider during polyester formations .
For example , if you have say during a polyester formation , if you have something like this , there is one more very common side reaction is happens is by beta elimination reaction .
So , with this you can generate free acid group and a alkene group here , at this is very common by if you have a beta hydrogen present then by doing a 6 membered considered reaction , it might do a side reaction .
And you can end up getting new functional group or new products , which might give you color in the at the end of the reaction , so that is one example .
So , third thing you can do as I was mentioning is that you change the catalyst or sometimes catalyst a I said might accelerate the side reactions as well .
And if you are doing in a solution , you are doing this poly step polymerization reaction solution , then you can also try and change the solvent .
Now , so these are the things you can try out , if your reaction goes wrong and of course , if this nothing else work with this you might have to consider changing your reaction monomer , you are changing your monomers all together .
Now , let us go back to the last lecture , we talked about that the k rate constant for step polymerization is quite low 10 to the minus 3 liter per mole per second .
Now , there are few exceptions , there are actually very few exception , one example is the reactions with diacid chlorides .
For example , if you have diacid chloride , chloride plus diol forming polyester polyester , say diacid chloride plus diamine polyamide .
Now , these diacid chloride reactions with dial or diamine there are very fast and k r of the order of 10 to the power 4 to 10 to the power of 5 L in term of per second inverse , which means they are much fast reaction compared to the normal step polymerization reactions .
And this first reaction are you know the has been taken that , this the fastness of these reactions has been taken .
And it has been used in making polymers by interfacial polymerization .
And I will come to the example of interfacial and polymerization .
Interfacial polymerization reactions are happened in the interface between 2 liquid phase , 2 monomers are taken in two different liquid phase and the reaction happen in the interface .
For example the polycarbonate , most of the polycarbonate major rate of the polycarbonates are synthesized by this interfacial polymerization bisphenol this is the monomer bisphenola .
And this is phosgene bisphenola is taken in the aqua sodium hydroxide solution and phosgene is passed through a organic solvent , in this case say methylene chlorideforming BPA PC or bisphenola poly carbonate .
Now , what is the mechanism , you have BPA bisphenol a present in the aqua solutions of sodium hydroxide , so you have phenolate salt .
Now , this at the interface react with phosgene forming this come out which again with reaction with this phenolate salt will form a dimer in this case and reaction will proceed further in this way .
Now , what is what is the problem here the only one thing to consider that this is a water soluble monomer , this bisphenola in a sodium hydroxide solution and this phosgene is formed through the organic medium in this case methylene chloride .
So , when this is formed this is a methylene chloride soluble species , so this will stay in the methylene chloride solution .
To react , now if you what to if you what this to react with the bisphenola phenolate ion to form a poly carbonate species , this has to migrate to the interface , this is currently now in the organic phase and this is in the aqueous phase .
So , the reaction the chances of reacting of this two species is low , the chances of this species reacting with this species is low .
So , this is a very slow reaction , if you do the reaction in this way this will give you a very slow reaction .
So , what is done to tackle this problem a tri a amine is added in the organic medium , say triethylamine or trimethylamine and when this reacts with this species it is form a salt now this is water soluble .
So , now , you have a water soluble species , again this is water soluble .
So , now , they can do reaction in the water side of the interface , so the reaction become faster .
So , you have to add this amine catalyst to facilitate the reaction and have the reaction happening in first way , no first space .
The same thing you can do if you what to keep this in the organic medium you can add a phase transfer catalyst in the water side , which will then complex with this bisphenol a salt and bring it closer to the organic medium .
So , then the reaction of this two reacting species will be happening in the organic side of the interface .
So , either you can add trimethylamine to bring this species to closer to water side or you can add a phase transfer catalyst to bring this bisphenol a ion to the organic side to make the reaction faster .
Bisphenol a poly carbonate is having this commercial trade names , I will be giving all this you know some of the trade names of this polymers in the next few slides as well .
So , what are the characterize , for the characteristic for the interfacial polymerization we just discussed one that polymerization occurs the interfacial of two liquids and each of the liquid phase contains one reactant .
Now , because reaction is very fast you saw the rate constant of the reaction is very high .
So , the reaction is very fast , so you can do it at low temperature in room temperature and it is usually done at a temperature between 0 to 50 degree centigrade .
Now , because the reaction is happening in the interface and at interface one one reactant is reacting with one of the other reactant .
So , you do not need not to maintain a stoichiometry of say very close to one is to one like the other linear poly condensation reaction here .
Because , the stoichiometry are the interface is always maintained at one is to one , because reaction is not happening in the valve phase of the two monomers it is happening only at the interface and because reaction happening one is to one .
So , the stoichiometry at the reaction side , which is the interface is always maintained at one is to one .
So , you do not need make a effort to maintain the stoichiometry of the two monomers close to one is to one .
Now , the reaction is fast , so the when the monomer defuse to the interface immediately it find a chain end reactive chain end and in reacts before even can approach to the other monomer , which means that this unlike this linear poly condensation reaction , which talked about it happens in a kinetic control way and it is very fast .
So , what is the outcome that molecular build up is much easier , because the as soon as the monomers defuse from the bulk to interface it reacts with the chain end and the chain grows one after one .
And in other case normal linear poly condensation case you have dimmer , trimer , tetramer and it go slowly one after one , but in this case the monomers comes by diffusion to the interface reacts with the chain end .
So , the chain grows in size , so it is very you know it is comparatively much easier to build molecular weight .
And as the reactions are happening or the monomers is getting added at the end of the chain , high molecular weight even possible at low conversion .
Unlike the normal poly condensation or step polymerization process .
And because the diffusion is slower compared to the actual reaction , polymerization reaction this reaction this polymerization reaction are often diffusion controlled .
So , what are the requirements for a successful inter polymerization interfacial polymerization you need to have a inorganic base , which you require to neutralize the produce HCl otherwise HCl with go back and hydrolyze the salt .
In this case the example I showed you polycarbonate the sodium hydroxide was present to neutralize the HCl byproduct .
And the other way also you should restrict or minimize the acid chloride hydrolysis , because if it hydrolyze and form a plane alcohol , then it will just acid chloride if it hydrolyze to form simple acid carboxylic acid .
Then the reactivity will come down the reaction rate will be much lower and it will not happen it will not take place in the temperature we are working .
Proper choice of solvent , you must be taken and you need , because this reaction is happening interface .
So , if you start well you can generate more and more interface and by doing by generating more and more interface you can make the reaction the polymerization reaction faster .
So , product might will form much faster rate , if you are not starting the reaction .
So , what are the disadvantage in spite of all this advantages , this is not this interfacial polymerization are not practiced very frequently commercially , so there must be some disadvantages .
And the main disadvantages are that the acid chloride acid chlorides are very costly .
So , it is is not very economic in true sense and as you as you saw that we have to use wider lot of organic solvent and handling that large amount of organic solvent recycling them , and storing them and is a environmental hazard as well storing and handling them this organic solvent .
So , you know increasingly people are trying to avoid this root simply to avoid this use of large amount of organic solvent , which are not environmentally friendly .
Now , also polymers if you with it is presented in a solution most and most commonly in the organic solvent .
So , you need to take out the polymerization by precipitation for example , in poly carbonate case the poly carbonate are solvable in the methylene chloride phase .
So , you have to at the end of the polymerization you have to take out the poly carbonate by steam precipitation if you steam precipitation .
So , there are always chances of having more impurities , compared to if you are doing in a bulk condition or a in a solution pure solution and also it is a batch process it is very difficult to do it continuously and as this reaction is kinetically controlled .
So , this byproduct as the byproduct HCl is not taking part in the reverse reaction , so this reaction is kinetically controlled .
The chances of forming cyclics are much more , because cyclics are not reacting with the byproduct and forming the linear product once again , which means once cyclics forms it will remain in the final product .
So , chances of having more cyclics are more in this interfacial polymerization .
So , now we move to the different polymers , in coming few slides I just wanted to give you the standard synthetic process of the common commercial step polymers .
Starting from polyester this is not exclusive least of polymers or it is not the detailed synthetic process or all the processes , which are utilized commercially .
I just wanted to give you a brief idea of different types of step polymers and how they are synthesized commercially , just in a very brief .
We will start with polyester and just example we will take is the most important and most used polyester poly ethylene terephthalate .
This is the structure we have been showing you many times , these are several ways you can see synthesis PET Poly Esters Terephthalate , you can do take a ethylene ethylene glycol and diacid terephthalate acid .
And direct reaction you can take instead of terephthalate acid you can take dimethyl ester of terephthalate acid you can take acid chloride and acid an hydride and so on an hydride and so on .
But , this reactions we know this direct esterification of alcohol and acids or say ester an acid groups are very slow reactions .
So , you may require high temperature , so this are typical not used commercially this two reactions are not used commercially .
What did the commercial way of synthesis or the most practiced the synthetic process of making polyester or poly ethylene terephthalicin .
This case is by ester exchange it can be done either starting from dimethyl ester of terephthalic acid or from terephthalic acid itself .
It is a two stage ester exchange process , first stage dimethyl terephthalicd M T is reacted with excess of ethylene glycol at say around moderate temperature and methanol is distilled out to form this compound .
And then these are now heated to a much higher temperature and the ethylene glycol is distilled out from the reaction .
So , between two of this molecules exchange ester exchange happen and as you take out this ethylene glycol from the system polymerization medium the polymer start growing slowly this is the .
And another way of making the PET is instead of taking dimethyl terephthalate , you can start with terephthalicacid and make first this an then follow the same process .
So , this is the most this is the commercial root of synthesis poly and these are the names trade names , which under which under which this poly ethylene terephthalate are sold in the market .
We will move to the next class of polymers step polymers polyamides and we have this is linear poly polymerization reactions this is aliphatic diamine with aliphatic diacid you can directly under go reaction to form linear polyamide .
And this is you know it is known as nylon 6 6 and this is very common polymers starting from hexamethylene diamine and adipic acids .
Now , in last slide we saw aliphatic diamine and aliphatic diacids , now we want to move to the aliphatic diamines and aliphatic diester or diacid chloride in this case .
And these this polyamides are completely formed from aromatic groups containing aromatic groups .
So , these are aromatic polyamides and commonly known as aramid polymers and because the reactivity of this nitrogen attach to the aromatic ring is much less compared to if it as a simple aliphatic aliphatic aliphatic group .
In this case we cannot simply do the polymerization reaction with diamine and diacids you require much reactive component functional group .
So , typically in case of aromatic polyamide synthesis , aromatic diamines are reacted with aromatic diacid chloride and you get this completely aromatic polyamides .
Instead of you can use the para substituted diamine with para substitute diacids to form this linear polyamides aromatic polyamides .
And this is known as kepler as a trade name and this is nomex and these are both nomex and kepler have very high melting points .
You know they are used for very high in the application where you require very high temperature to sustain even kepler has a melting point which is higher than 500 centigrade , sometimes it even burn before it melt .
So , these are very high polymers which are high very high performance polymers we move to next say we have just given generic example of branching and cross linking in last lecture .
Here , we I show you a definite examples you have ethyl an hydride here and we have a glycerol , when it reacts in this to reacts it form a linear chain along with a branch coming from this hydroxyl group .
So , this is how you can carry out a there is a one example of forming bunch you know synthesis bunch polyester .
Move to the next one which is cross link polyester in this case one example can be taken is a maleic anhydride reaction with ethylene glycol ; and once it forms the polymerization is complete at the end you have a double bond in the polyester back bone .
So , you have synthesized in this way a unsaturated polyester .
Now , this double bond are available to react radically or some other chain polymerization mechanism by itself alone , are you can add a another monomers like styrene or MMA methyl methacrylate and then copolymerized with and form a cross link .
So , here you first make a step polymers , by step polymerization mechanism you make a unsaturated polyester , and then by doing a chain reaction you can do a cross linking reaction to form a cross linking reaction .
If this instauration is at the end of the polyester , which you formed then these are known as alkyd polyesters , how do you do that , the same reaction like in this case phthalic an hydride glycerol there you are hiding one mono functional acids , which has a alkene group a double bond at the other end .
These are typically you know , these are available in the fatty acid there are lots of fatty acid which are which can be unsaturated available where you have a unsaturation or double bond in a other side not necessary end , but other side .
Now , this double bond is free to undergo chain polymerization .
So , you can first stage you do a step polymerize to syntheses this and then you can take this and do a second step of chain polymerization either by oxidizing this or no using the other methods .
So , you can cross link this polyester unsaturated polyester chains , so by doing this we can make a cross linked network .
Next set of polymers we go is polysulfones and polyketones the generic structure is this its similar to the bisphenol astructure is polycarbonate X is , but in this case X is allied instead of H and Y is either a carbonyl or SO 2 group .
Now , typically this aromatic halides are not very reactive towards a nucleophilic substitution reaction , but because you have a strong electron withdrawing group present here CO or CO 2 , CO or SO 2 this becomes more reactive towards nucleophilic substitution .
So , you can carry out the reaction with this the salt of phenolate phenolate ion and you can make a polymers like linked this .
And the commonly these are called I will show you the example in the next slide , if you have CO these are called polyketones and specifically this structure is called poly ether ether ketones and simple this called polyether ketone , you have if you have a sulfonegroup SO 2 group in here then these are polysulfones .
So , this is poly ether ether ketone , this is polyether ketone , this is poly bisphenol a polyether sulfone and this is simply called polyether sulfone .
And this is these are the trade names of this polymers in this trade name they are sold Radel and Udel .
They are partially crystalline this PEEK and PEK poly ether ether ketone and polyether ketone they are partially crystalline polymers they have a T g around this range and they have a very high melting point .
So , they are they are again very high performance high performing polymers , which are used at very high temperature applications ; and they can be used in a applications where the constant temperature is say around as high as 240 to 280 degree .
So , they are very you know high performing polymers this poly sulfonesor polyether sulfones , they are amorphous in nature the T g is around one they are also very high T g 180 to 230 and they have continuous use temperature is between 150 to 200 .
So , they also used in applications where string and link requirement for high temperature .
Next set we move to poly aromatic polyimides , these are formed by reaction with diamine with dianhydridedi , an aromatic dianhydrideso aromatic diamines are reacted with aromatic dianhydrides , And first this is formed then one cyclization this is this imides are formed these are again very high performing polymers they are used for applications requiring very high temperature and they are known in under the trade name of captain and .
There are also amorphous T g is very high and their continuous use temperature is 300 to 350 degree centigrade temperature .
I am just moving it fast , because this just information I my aim is to just give you the generic synthetic procedure for this class of step polymers .
Now , you can always go through any detailed publications or in a detailed text book where you will find out the detail you know detail method of making this polymers .
But just for this course I am just giving you a over view of this different step polymer and just generic method of synthesizing this .
So , we move to polyether imides again this is the process of making polyether imides and these are again very high heat polymers ; that means , this having very capability of you know they can be used in very high temperature .
They are known in the trade name of ultem , there amorphous T g is as high as 215 degree centigrade and there are constant use temperature is between 18 170 to 180 .
So , in the if the application required that you the polymer will should be present at this high temperature .
So , you can use ultem as your material ; obviously , these polymers are costly , because they have , so high performance and they are also difficult to synthesize there are the same time much costlier then the common polymers .
This is another example another set of polymers is polyamide imides you take this aromatic diamines with one side poly anhydride and the carbo oxalic acid silica acids to form this amide polyamide imides .
And this is sold as a trade name as turlon , this is also very high heat polymer , this is also amorphous T g having 270 to 285 and the constant use temperature is 220 to 235 .
Now , there are other step there are several other step polymers , which you know because of time or this course of this polymers is not to go through the detailed synthesis procedure of this polymers .
So , there are this is just a to mention that there are other step polymers as well listed in this slide .
And which you can go through any text book or any standard publications to find out , if you are interested how they are synthesized and what are their property you know basic property .
So , what I wanted to do next to just give you idea about step copolymers , now if you have say a amino acid R COH and NS 2 R double dash COH .
Now , obliviously it will form , now why do we put the bracket will be always next to each other should I put the bracket here and put N like this , it may not be it could be somewhere here and there could be another bracket here .
So , these is one example of making copolymers in step by step polymerization method you take say a by functional monomers A B type .
And if you have two different group in side then you can make a copolymer , but this has not very regularly used method from making copolymer , if you the practiced methods are normally if you say , if you are making a polyester , if you have say CH 2 CH 2 OH ethylene glycol .
Now , if you have this along with plus if you have say terephthalic acid in the other side .
Now , you have to make the total of these total of this diol with the ratio of this thing is close to one is to one .
So , total number of functional group of OH group is almost close to the number of groups of COH group , so that the polymers take place .
Now , in this case you make a copolymer , which have this poly ethylene terephthalic unit and also have a polybutylene terephthalate unit .
So , this a example of copolymers of PET and PBT polyethylene terephthalate copolybutylene terephthalate depending upon the ratio of these two you know which in which one will be higher or not .
Now , what do you except when you make this copolymer will there be alternative copolymer , that mean will you have this ethylene glycol group .
And butylene glycol group butylene glycol group always next to each other will we expect that or will you expect that there be will random copolymers .
Now , if you normal in the normal step polymerization reaction , because this goes through a thermodynamically control process .
That means , the byproducts also take part in the reverse reaction and the chains intermediate chains also take part reactions with exchange reaction between them .
So , they reshuffle all the time you know during entire reaction there always reshuffling happening between the chains .
So , there is a transfer happening between the extraction is happening between two groups , which means that if the reaction proceed through thermo dynamical control , if the reaction is thermodynamically control controlled .
Then you will always land up in a completely random copolymer , you understand why , because this reaction when they are happening there is slow reaction .
So , during the reaction time the byproducts also taking part in the reverse reaction and also the intermediate chains they are also reacting with each other by exchange ester exchange .
And by doing , so they are always reshuffling between them self at the end you always have a completely random copolymer .
Now , if you are doing the other reaction say for example , if I go back to the polycarbonate example in this case , if I instead of taking this BPA .
If I take this BPA and bisphenol a and also some other di hydroxyl group say something else some substituted group here , instead of methyl we have ethyl group or some other group .
And you have taken that is one is to one and you are heating with phosgene .
Now , in this case reaction is kinetically controlled , which means once the polymer all as a matter of cyclics we just talked about few minutes back .
Once they are formed they are not taking part in the reshuffling reaction or reaction with the byproduct reverse reaction with the byproduct .
Because , they very fast reaction once the product is formed the byproduct HCl is getting neutralized with sodium hydroxide , which means there is one reaction is formed .
They are not taking part in the reshuffling reactions which means the nature of the copolymer would depend upon the reactivity of this group .
Unlike the earlier case say butylene glycol and ethylene glycol even if there are were any differences in the activity between two hydroxide groups .
Ultimately at the beginning even if they are making blocky copolymers at the end by doing reshuffling finally , you would land up in a random copolymer .
But in this case , the nature of the copolymer would depend upon the reactivity of the functional group if this functional group is same having same reactivity with the other functional group then it will form a random copolymer .
If they are different , then the most react in a more reactive group would react faster forming a block , then the second monomer would react forming a another block .
So , in this case because it is a kinetically controlled fast reaction reactivity of the reacting monomers would determine , whether its form a random copolymer or a or a block a copolymer .
If there are significant differences in the reactivity of the two diols then there will be a blocky nature in the copolymers .
So , you understand the terminally controlled polymers would give always a statistically random copolymer whether whereas , in kinetically controlled polymerization reaction .
The nature of the copolymer would depend upon the reactivity of the functional groups of the monomers , if there are significant difference in the reactivity of the functional groups among the comonomers .
Then there will be blocky nature , in the copolymer resulting copolymers , if there is no reactivity difference then there is no .
And you have to consider what is the diffusivity ?
You know reactivity coupled with the reactivity if some monomers is diffusing first at the interface it will react faster .
So , when I talking about the reactivity it would also include the diffusivity diffusivity aspect of the monomers is well .
So , if the if the reaction between the one monomer with the phosgene is faster , then it will be a blocky copolymer .
So , we have come to the end of this module and what we will do now , I want to tell my expectation you know what are the learning objective in this module in the step growth polymerization ; now what I expect from a student after going through this module .
Let us , go one by one I expect that a student after going through this module should understand the mechanistic differences between step and chain copolymers , chain polymerization should which polymerization , so it should be polymerization .
So , I expect that a student should understand the mechanistic difference between chain and step polymerization , if I stop a reaction after some conversion , what you expect in the polymerization medium , how the molecular weight build up with time and so on .
What are the functional groups you require for a step polymers or a chain polymers , so on .
If I give you a structure of the of the polymer synthetic polymer , then you should be able to identify by which process it has been synthesized , whether it is a step polymers polymerization process or a chain polymerization process .
Just by looking at the structure you should be able to tell or you should be able to identify , what is the difference you know in which method by which method it has been synthesized .
You should know the relationship between X n bar the number average degree of polymerization with r the stoichiometry ratio and p the conversion in a normal step polymerization process .
And you know by then this car others equation and you also should appreciate that the fact to make high polymer high molecular weight polymer you should have p value close to one .
So , you should push the reaction as much as possible and also if you want to build a high molecular weight polymer your r should be close to 1 .
And I have given few example during my lectures you should be able to calculate the M n there the number average molecular weight from X n the degree number average degrees of polymers .
And so as M W from X w you know number average with weight average molecular weight from , weight average degree of polymerization .
If you want to control the molecular weight , if have want some reason you want to target some molecular weight with both the ends having some particular functional group or no functional group .
Then you should know the strategies if you want to have some functional group at the end of the polymers both side , then you should use the monomers containing that functional groups in higher amount and the ratio should be according to your target .
And if you at the end to the polymer if you do not want to have any reactive functional group , then you should use mono functional chain stoppers and your molecular weight , when you use a chain stoppers , what is your target molecular weight you know the calculation hence you should be knowing the calculation .
From the kinetics of step polymerization you should understand that you know to achieve high conversion and as a result high molecular weight .
The what are the preferred conditions you know it should be external catalyzed it should be open driven system where you your systems should have ability to take out the small molecular byproduct as much as possible from the system .
And you must continue the reaction for long time , because the kinetics is lower and also is always preferred is always preferable to have a high equilibrium constant , which will depend upon the reactive .
So , if you design you can design highly reactive monomers , then they will have naturally high equilibrium constant .
So , it will be easier for you to make high molecular even if you cannot remove the small molecular weight byproduct completely or quantity from the reaction medium .
A student should know are expected to know the molecular distribution and polydispersity index in a step polymerization and we should also know that the for any high molecular step polymer the PDI should be close to 2 or as a matter of close to 2 .
And he also should know that why in reality PDI always end up being slightly higher than two because of side reaction cyclization .
And the same time he should or she should know , what are the ways you can minimize the cycling formation in a step polymerization .
And a student should know the condition and you know what are the what are the conditions you know what are the monomers to be used if you what a branching or cross linking .
And if you do not what are the monomers you should not use for branching and you should also know the utility , if you what sometimes it is undesired to have branching in the polymer .
And sometimes it is deliberately you know wanted it is deliberate somebody , who will deliberately want to include want the branching or cross linking in the polymers .
So , what are the ways you can do that or what are the ways you can have avoid that and what are the utilities or the problem if a student being .
So , if you what to work in the lab or if you join in the industry you should be able to know what are the complete list of criteria , you know we have gone in last lecture to carry out a successful step polymerization .
And in case following all the normal process normal directions , if you do not build high molecule weight what are the first things to look for , what are the common trouble shooting ?
You should first look for that also you should by know and have a graphs in by this time .
And in also know different what are the common step polymers , what are their property and what are the different ways of making step polymers , same polymers can be making different ways .
And one including what is the fundamental differences in interfacial polymerization they utilize the very first reaction of diacylchloride or diacylchloride .
And what are the mechanism and what are the problem in interfacial polymerization .
And finally , different commercial polymers you know student have a idea at least you should not I do not expect that a master of all the polymers , step polymers there as many step polymers .
At least I have some idea that these are the polymers are made by synthesized by step polymerization mechanism and one the most common ways of synthesized I have given examples in today ’ s lecture for quite a few .
And I also did not I could not include several others .
So , I would expect that which are not covered in this in this lecture you please read the book or any other text to go through the common synthetic method for those polymers as well .
And you should be knowing the polymers , which I have covered in today ’ s lecture .
So , with this I conclude this module on step growth polymers and polymers and polymerization step growth polymerization mechanism .
And next lecture onwards I will start the chain polymers and chain polymerization with starting with radical chain polymerization .
Hello !
Today we will be talking about immobilized enzymes .
So far we have seen the structure and function of enzymes as they are available in the living cells .
We have also seen that functionally they are very efficient catalysts in the sense that they provide a very high degree of specificity , a very high degree of turn over number as far as their function is concerned .
They also can catalyze a number of stereospecific chemical transformations that are otherwise difficult to carry out in a single step by other chemical routes and also a major advantage of mild operating conditions which make them very attractive industrial catalyst .
But the fact is that these catalysts have not found such a wide spread use as far as industry is concerned excepting in some conventional applications in foods or pharmaceuticals which are the natural processing agent in the case of industrial applications .
Bulk of the other industries has not made use of these biocatalysts at least up to the beginning of the last two decades .
If you look at the industrial applications until sixties there was not a very significant application of enzymes in industrial processing .
The major limitation , you also noticed during our understanding of the structure - function relationship of the enzyme , is that they are usually very unstable and that probably is one of the major limitations as far as enzymes are concerned with respect to their application .
They cannot be used conventionally in organic solvent .
That is the perception that means their structural confirmation in which they are catalytically active is functional only in aqueous medium .
Their activity or their function in the normal temperature range also put sometimes a disadvantageous situation in the sense that at those temperatures many of the microbial activities are also optimum and therefore they lead to contamination of products and therefore their industrial application becomes restricted .
Also a major factor in the limitations of the application of soluble enzymes in industry has also been the soluble nature of enzymes that means they have to be used in water soluble form .
When we have to use them in water soluble form it only means that the process has to be in the batch mode .
That means you take an enzyme solution or a substrate solution , add a quantity of soluble enzyme in a batch mode , provide the optimum temperature and pH , carry out the reaction and terminate the reaction by changing one of the operational parameter either by heating it or by drastic change of pH so that the reaction is terminated and then extract the product .
In this whole process the major problem is that one has to discard the enzyme , one has to deactivate the enzyme and the enzyme is usually not possible to be recovered at the end of the process .
Because recovering the enzyme from reaction mixture will be as difficult or as tedious if not more as production of the original enzyme itself and in most cases enzyme being produced by living systems are usually expensive commodities and therefore their deactivation at the end of one batch operation is not a desirable feature and that has been a major limitation .
The two issues of unstability and possibility of their use repeatedly or in a continuous mode has been the major driving force of looking at immobilization as an approach to provide a vector platform for the use of enzyme in industrial application .
A major question that will come is what do we mean by immobilization ?
What is immobilization ?
If you look at for a very broad based and operational definition of immobilization we can say that enzymes are physically confined or localized in a defined region of a space .
That is a definition of immobilized enzymes .
The enzymes that are physically confined or localized in a defined region of a space with retention of their catalytic activity and which can be used repeatedly or continuously in a process are usually considered as the immobilization enzyme preparations .
This is basically an operational definition .
I like you to concentrate on at least three major phrases built in , in this definition .
One is physically confined or localized in a defined region of space .
That means the enzyme molecule which is homogenously suspended in a soluble preparation has to be then localized in a narrow region of space and this is no longer uniformly , homogenously distributed in a reaction mixture .
An analogy can be made to a heterogeneous catalysis .
In the case of chemical catalysis many of the catalyst are used in a heterogeneous phase , while the use of soluble enzyme will provide a homogenous catalysis .
That means the distribution or composition of every species in the reaction mixture whether it is catalyst or a substrate or a product is uniform throughout the reaction mixture .
The use of immobilization enzymes will lead to a heterogeneous catalysis .
That means while substrate and the product might be homogenously distributed the enzyme will be localized in some area of the space .
It will not be homogenously distributed at every point in the reaction mixture .
The second phrase which is very important is the retention of their catalytic activity .
That means if you do any modification so as to arrive at an immobilization enzyme preparation it should require the retention of their catalytic activity .
Otherwise it doesn ’ t have any meaning to have immobilized enzyme preparation .
At the end of the immobilization enzyme preparation retention of catalytic activity is a major requirement .
Retention of catalytic activity is a very relative term .
Relative in the sense that hundred percent retention of catalytic activity at the end of any processing step is not feasible .
So when we say retention of catalytic activity you are implying that a major fraction of the activity must be retained .
The degree of retention will vary from enzyme to enzyme ; also the more unstable the enzyme the poor will be retention or method of immobilization ; more harsher the method that means if the enzyme is subjected to more harsh treatment in terms of pH , chemicals or temperature the inactivation may be more .
Ultimately a major portion of enzyme activity must be retained .
If the enzyme activity leads to 0 or 5 % or 10 % at the end of the immobilization I don ’ t think we should logically call it an immobilization enzyme preparation .
The third issue and which is also operationally very important is which can be used repeatedly or continuously in a process.Ultimate objective of immobilization is to use it either repeatedly in a batch mode so that the same enzyme preparation is used in repeated batches one after another or it can be used in a continuous reactor like a plug flow reactor or a continuous stir tank reactor so that you can process some substrate over a long period of time using a same amount of enzyme and therefore decreasing the cost of enzyme per unit quantity of the product produced .
The major objective , from the industrial point of view , of immobilization enzyme would be to reduce the cost of enzyme input into any processing per unit quantity of the product to a significant level and that is what is often achieved .
This definition takes care of the three major factors one is the localization of the enzyme or connectivity over a major substrate and such an immobilization can be achieved by different means .
There are number of methods .
If you can couple an enzyme preparation to a matrix , an insoluble matrix , which is not soluble anyway couple whereas the enzyme activity is retained and this being an insoluble matrix , a particulate matrix , one can pack it into a column or one can use it in a stirred reactor and give a feed continuously and take all the product stream continuously .
Both the things are feasible .
Alternatively instead of coupling to a matrix it could also be feasible that you entrap the enzyme into a matrix .
For example you take a permeable micro capsule in which the enzyme molecule can be entrapped such that the enzyme molecules cannot come out but the substrate or the product can freely diffuse in and out and such a system will also be called immobilized system .
A very extreme situation can be considered of immobilization where we are not really having a physical preparation in the immobilized form but if you use a soluble enzyme in a membrane reactor , a typical membrane reactor , and this is a ultra filtration reactor in which the enzyme molecules are put in and this membrane is able to restrict the flow of enzyme and you can put in the substrate here , the product can go out and the enzyme can be retained in the membrane reactor .
Let us say an ultra filtration cell in which the molecular weight cut off of the membrane is such that the enzyme is not allowed to pass through and retained as the retentate whereas the unconverted substrate and the product formed is passed through a membrane and can be collected .
In such a case also as a system we will call as an immobilized enzyme system although the preparation will no longer be immobilized in the physical form , in the form of like what we considered as the bound preparation or entrapped preparation but still functional because in such a system you can use the enzyme continuously or repeatedly without loosing in the product stream .
So all these systems will be considered in the format of immobilized enzyme preparation and the enzyme preparation may be in the coupled form in the insoluble matrix , it could be entrapped into a semi permeable cell or entrapped in the gel because gel also provides you a porous network in which the enzyme can be entrapped and they will not be allowed to pass out through the gel pores because of the size limitation once they are entrapped and a similar thing applies to a ultra filtration reaction .
We often consider that if you couple a soluble enzyme molecule on to a solid matrix whether it is an inorganic matrix or an organic matrix or a gel that is the conventional form of immobilization .
Unconventionally one can also make all these conditions feasible that means you can localize the enzyme in a defined area of space that is in an ultra filtration cell .
I presume that you understand what ultra filtration cell is .
You have a stern vessel in which at the bottom there is a membrane with a narrow molecular weight cut off .
That means it will allow only substances below a certain molecular weight to pass through it .
The molecules with higher molecular weight will be retained .
In such a reactor if you use an enzyme by putting substrate in and taking out the product which are low molecular weight compounds and enzyme being high molecular weight molecule will be retained in the reactor during use .
Such systems also will be considered as immobilized enzyme systems .
In fact although industrially such systems are not very commonly employed as far as the academic study is concerned these systems have been applied .
One of the early systems which were applied was way back in late sixties and early seventies to hydrolysis of cellulose and starch .
Because the starch product is low molecular weight glucose similarly cellular product is also glucose .
This comes out of the product and the enzyme and the unconverted substrate remains in the retentate .
One limitation will be that the product has to be a low molecular product .
That ’ s why it has not industrially become very attractive .
There are problems still as far as the cost of the membrane is concerned the following operational problems .
There are still problems .
Today in the literature we will find probably a few thousand methods of immobilization and not that all of them have been commercially viable , because commercially viability is an issue which is linked directly to economics , the power of economics .
So it does not restrict to but what we are talking of the basic definition of immobilized enzyme that you can do it in that matter .
As a matter of fact this is an artificial cell as you can consider let us say living cell itself .
In living cell also the enzyme is entrapped through a semi permeable membrane which does not allow the enzyme molecules to pass through and some of the product molecules from the cell also are usually ripped off .
The cell membrane is much more specific and has quiet distinct features compared to an ordinary ultra filtration cell which only functions based on molecular weight .
The cell membrane has still more specific functions and more elaborate functions but here the function is only based on the molecular weight cut off .
The second point is that what are the major advantages or what are the major features and why should we immobilize enzymes ?
There are mainly two motivating factors .
I would like to give you a brief about the historical perspectives .
The whole concept of immobilization of enzymes started sometime in mid sixties and not before that mainly for two reasons .
One is that the scientist wanted to apply some of the enzymes for industrial processing and obviously for industrial processing you need certain operational advantages The major disadvantages in the case of the enzymes is the restriction in the best mode of processing , the stability , some of the physico chemical properties in respect of pH optimum , temperature optimum , substrate specificity and they could all be taken care for industrial processing .
The second motivating factor was many people also wanted to study the enzymes in their natural habitat or at least as close to the natural habitat .
When we talk about the enzyme , structure and functional aspects , we are missing one thing that whatever studies have been made in those aspects they have been made after isolating the enzyme from a cell .
It has been de linked from its natural habitat and when we take an enzyme sample in a buffer , its natural structure function may not be identical as it happens in the living cell and that has been recognized very well .
If you notice the half life of an enzyme in a living cell you can make certain indirect calculations .
You can notice that in a living cell the enzyme is not as unstable as we notice it in the laboratory or pharmaceutical applications .
The turn over of the enzyme molecule itself in a living cell is quite low .
The cell does not synthesize because protein synthesis in a living cell is quite an energy intensive process and cells often will like to economise the energy consumption as far the protein synthesis is concerned .
Therefore the half life of the enzyme in the living cell , the stability is much higher compared to a free state .
If they can try to bring as close to the living environment and the process which they adopted was immobilization .
Because most of the enzymes which people understood very well were the membrane bound enzymes and they noticed that in the membrane bound enzyme there was some kind of a physical coupling between the enzyme and the insoluble membrane as a matrix .
Therefore they thought that coupling of an enzyme to an insoluble matrix would be a desirable feature to study enzymes or immobilized enzymes as a model system for natural enzymes and then one can really look into the various properties in terms of their operational properties , in terms of their kinetic properties and also in terms of their substrate specificity and other aspects .
After isolation from the cell you are trying to bring back because you see when they are in a living cell you have no means to study them excepting indirect calculation that this might be happening and this is the rate of flux .
In fact most of the metabolic pathways although we understand qualitatively much better but still the quantitative fluxes of the individual enzyme catalysed reactions in a metabolic pathway is still a very difficult aspect .
So the only way out left to a scientist is that one isolates and tries to mimic the conditions of a cell so that one can probably try to interpret the functioning in a cell ; how it is happening and the immobilization provided isolation of the enzyme .
You don ’ t keep it in a cell ; you isolate but then again revert back , kind of a pseudo cell for example you entrap that into a micro capsule which is continuous semi - permeable membrane or take a very fine porous film attach an enzyme molecule to this and then this mimics as much as probably your enzyme was supported on a membrane in the living cell and study its properties .
So they were the two motivations and when we talk about the operational advantages because of our major interest we will look at enzymes as an industrial catalyst for use in industrial reactors for conversion of substrates into products .
The immobilization offers n number of advantages and one of the major advantages which we have already talked about in the definition itself is its reusability .
That means the cost of the enzyme per unit product is significantly reduced by the reusability .
Instead of the possibility of using only in soluble mode in a batch reactor you can use in a variety of application modes .
A variety of reactor types can be used for carrying out the transformation or reactions instead of using only a batch stirred reactor as we can afford only for a soluble enzyme .
Another major advantage is the rapid termination of reaction .
In the case of the soluble enzyme the only means of terminating a reaction is to deactivate the enzyme either by drastic change of pH , heating , boiling in a water bath or adding some kind of chemical , irreversible inhibitors of an enzyme , which can inactivate the enzyme .
But in the case of immobilized enzyme you can repeatedly terminate by physically separating it .
Even if you use in a batch mode by physically filtering off the enzyme preparation , the reaction is stopped .
There is no enzyme present and the reaction is stopped .
That gives you a very great operational significance and the use of an immobilized enzyme also leads to relatively purer product .
In the case of a batch mode the enzyme is going along a product stream and in some cases the discharge of proteins into the product stream may cause purification problems .
Therefore the use of immobilized preparation in those cases will lead to a much purer product or significant convenience as far as the downstream processing of the product stream is concerned .
In fact many of the products which have been commercialized using immobilized enzyme preparations are for application in food and food constituents .
In the case of food constituent we don ’ t want the enzyme protein to go as a product in the product stream .
In the case of immobilized enzyme that problem is not there because the enzyme is already separated and the product stream as it is can be used as a food constituent directly in the product form .
In most cases the immobilization has also resulted in some altered physico - chemical properties .
When I say physico - chemical properties the most important properties probably for which enzymes are considered as poor candidates are their stability .
In most cases the stability is enhanced and therefore it becomes a desirable feature .
The other altered physico - chemical properties are optimum pH and specificity .
In many cases the altered optimum pH will result only on the basis of the nature of the carrier you are using .
If it is an ionizable carrier , charged carrier then only it will lead to a change in optimum pH as we will see subsequently .
But specificity also has been a factor .
In fact even one can have an altered km for an immobilized enzyme as compared to soluble enzyme which again depending upon the same feature as optimum pH that is the matrix is charged and the substrate is also charged where the partitioning effects , the apparent km might also change .
The third motivating factor was the use of the model system for natural enzymes that we discussed and which also has been a very significant reason for immobilizing enzymes .
Now let us look at the requirements of an immobilized system .
In fact any immobilized enzyme system has three major constituents , three major players The first player is the soluble enzyme .
We have to start with a good preparation of an enzyme isolated from a living system produced by fermentation or isolated from animals or plant cells .
You need a soluble enzyme .
The other is carrier .
You need a matrix to which the enzyme can be immobilized in general .
There might be some methods which may be carrier free .
But in most cases , carrier is a candidate which is required for a coupling of soluble enzyme onto an insoluble matrix .
The third player is in method of immobilization and the total performance of immobilized enzyme preparation will depend upon the combination of the interactions between these three players .
What are the properties we look at when we choose a soluble enzyme ?
We understand that we require a particular reaction to be catalyzed .
So the enzyme is fixed .
For the sake of convenience let us assume that we have to isomerise glucose to fructose with enzyme called glucose isomerase .
When we talk of the enzyme for immobilization if we want to …. .. immobilized enzyme preparation what properties are important for choosing the enzyme source ?
The major factor is that we will look for an enzyme preparation which has the high specific activity .
High specific activity means the catalytic power of the enzyme is much high .
That means per unit weight of the protein its activity is much higher .
This will depend upon two factors one is the source of the enzyme and the purity of the enzyme .
Purer the enzyme , the better for immobilization because you can have a very highly active immobilized enzyme preparation or the source will also be important , if you can choose a source which gives you an enzyme which has a much higher specific activity .
That means processing cost can be much lesser that is you have to put a much lesser protein for achieving the same catalytic function .
Next we will consider desirable operational parameters .
One of the major constraints of operational parameters is for many processes the operational parameters required for an enzymatic catalysis should not induce any side reactions .
For example take again the example of glucose isomerisation .
In addition to catalytic function by glucose enzyme , this process of glucose isomerisation can also take place in the presence of an alkali .
If your environmental pH is alkaline , seven plus , the isomerisation can take place naturally and the isomerisation product will not be only fructose but it will be plus few other hexoses which will be produced and the whole advantage of using an enzymatic process is lost .
In such case if you can have an enzyme preparation which has either a neutral or a slightly acidic pH optimum it is desirable .
In fact the immobilized enzyme preparation can be tailored so as to have at least minor adjustment of the operational parameters .
The third factor is stability .
In the light of specific activity , only your specific activity , again this will also depend on source of the enzyme .
One needs to choose the enzyme and its further processing for purification so as to have the three properties which are in the positive region and we choose the soluble enzymes on that basis .
The second candidate in the case of immobilized enzyme is carriers .
In terms of the total gross weight of the product for example if you look at the total immobilized enzyme preparation almost ninety nine points will be contributed by a carrier .
In one gram of immobilized enzyme , the enzyme preparation will be probably only a fraction of milligrams or if not more than one or two milligrams .
Bulk of the immobilization enzyme product will be in the form of carrier .
We are taking a water insoluble carrier .
One of the key parameter here is it has to be insoluble in reaction environment .
I am using a general term reaction environment mainly because while most of the reactions are to be carried out in aqueous medium today there are requirements that many of the reactions may be carried out in organic non - polar medium .
Therefore the carrier which we choose should be insoluble in the reaction environment and that is a major requirement .
It may ultimately depend upon the chemical composition of the carrier .
Logically the carrier should also be non - toxic to the enzymatic reaction and this should not act as an inhibitor or some kind of an irreversible inhibitor to the enzyme catalyzed reaction .
Another very important feature is resistance to microbial , thermal or mechanical degradation because as you recall right in our definition we mentioned that it is required to be used over a long period of time .
The use over a long period of time may involve many features which might expose the whole material to many features which may lead to microbial degradation , thermal degradation or mechanical degradation and the carrier should be resistant to them .
Therefore carrier itself should be very stable otherwise the stability of the enzyme will not have much of meaning .
The carrier should also have a large number of sites for binding of enzyme .
The major reason is that ultimately the objective of an immobilized enzyme system will be to have a very high activity .
To have a high functional reactivity one need as much of enzyme .
The activity or the loading of the enzyme on to the carrier must be very high , the higher you can make and that will require a large number of sites for binding of the enzyme on to the carrier .
This will require many of the functional groups to be present on the carrier .
It will also depend on the porosity on the carrier .
The porosity of the carrier depends on the surface area which will also result from the porosity as well as the particle size .
So surface area will also become quite important .
Finally if not a major scientific fact but at least the economic feature is the regenerability and cost .
Another criterion which plays a very key role into the carrier matrix .
Normally we will prefer a carrier which is not very expensive .
In an inexpensive carrier one may say that you may not be able to meet the other desirable properties .
One can choose an expensive carrier provided the carrier can be regenerated at the end of the exhaustion of the enzyme .
When I say immobilized enzyme should be used continuously or repeatedly again this means that it can be used for couple of days , couple of months , couple of years and not for ever .
At the end of the cycle of the operation of an immobilized enzyme preparation , if the carrier can be regenerated it is desirable even if its cost is high .
In fact you will notice that in some of the industrially used immobilized enzyme preparations the low cost carriers has been rejected mainly because of some of the undesirable properties that they cannot get you a very high enzyme loading on them and many of the expensive carriers have been used but only under the condition that they can be regenerated .
Carriers like organic ion exchange resins like D I cellulose and di Sephadex have been extensively used for immobilization of enzyme by absorption and after use when the whole enzyme is desorbed the carrier is again available for reuse .
To take care of all these desirable features of carrier the properties that you look in a carrier are chemical composition , specific surface area that means surface area per unit weight of the carrier , particle size and ratio of hydrophobic to hydrophilic groups mainly to achieve a very high degree of loading because one has to choose all the functional group of the enzyme molecule for coupling and therefore hydrophobic to hydrophilic groups on the carrier and finally the cost .
These are the four general features of properties one has to look in the carriers .
Large varieties of carriers have been used and are available for use fortunately and these carriers have been classified by various people in different modes , in different forms .
A very generalized scientific approach to classify them will be on the basis of their porosity .
Porosity is the basis for classification of carriers .
That is they can be non - porous .
The non - porous carriers will have a low specific surface area because the porous matrix will provide lot of internal surface in a matrix .
The only surface which is available is the external surface , only part .
To get a higher surface area you have to reduce the particle size which also has a great limitation of use because of the smaller the particle size its use in a packed …… is difficult because of the high pressure drops .
Its use in CSTR is difficult mainly because of its loss through the product stream if it is too fine a particle .
Therefore non - porous matrices usually have a limitation of low surface area .
As far as the chemical composition , ratio of hydrophobic to hydrophilic group or the cost is concerned it is a general feature .
Non - porous matrix also has an advantage .
Mainly they have been used extensively for bio medical applications where an additional desirable feature other than the ones we mentioned in the carriers is the prevention of interfacial immunological responses in the bio - medical system .
For example when you want to use an immobilized enzyme preparation for any bio - medical application it will interact with the blood stream and any external material in contact with the blood stream will generate a very vigorous immunological response and it has been noted that the non - porous matrices or the non - porous materials are much softer as far as these responses are concerned compared to porous ones .
The typical example of the use of the non - porous matrix in the bio - medical application has been nylon as a non - porous matrix which has been used to immobilize some of the therapeutic enzymes for use in contact with the blood stream .
The other group of matrices is porous matrices , the most preferred kind of material that are used for industrial applications and these matrices are control pore glass , control pore titanium and variety of other synthetic tailored materials which have been produced commercially for generating a high porosity for coupling of enzymes on them .
The third kind of material is gel structure .
They are porous in nature but they are usually flexible in the pore size or thermoelastic and the pore is flexible and the typical examples which have been used are collagen , poly acrylamide , gelatin and a large number of other gel structures have been used .
In the gel structure you can entrap the enzyme in the gel matrices and the advantage is that the enzyme can experience almost the same kind of water activity or the environment as very close to what is obtained in the case of a living cell .
Let us consider the gel matrix and the enzyme entrapped in the lattices .
The gel will not allow the enzyme to pass through but the small molecular weight substrate and product can easily be allowed to get in or come out .
Another way of classifying the carriers will be on the basis of chemical nature .
One can have either inorganic carriers or organic carriers .
In most cases the inorganic carriers as I mentioned are the whole range of control pore glass , control pore titanium many of the clays which are naturally occurring like bentonite , animal charcoal and things like that fall under inorganic but the organic carriers are usually polysaccharides , proteins and synthetic polymers .
Typical example of organic carriers are polysaccharides , cellulose , agarose , even cross linked dextran what we call industrially as sephadex .
This is nothing else but cross linked dextran molecules .
Then in the case of proteins almost like what we talked about gel structure , collagen and gelatin are typical examples and there is a whole range of synthetic polymers which have been reported and used for immobilizing enzymes which are usually polystyrene based , vinyl polymers , polyacrylamide and so on.You can classify and a large variety of carriers are available for use for immobilizing enzymes and the choice will depend upon various properties that we have listed .
So , welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry , and in this lecture today we are continuing our discussion which is left over from last lecture on frictional properties of polymer in dilute solution .
And then we will begin the important discussion on polymer characterization which is basically how to determine polymer molecular weight .
We plan to give just an overview of the techniques which can be used for a polymer determination of polymer molecular weight today .
And if time permits we will continue and discuss the method of dilute solution viscometry by which we can determine viscosity average molecular weight .
Now let us continue the discussion we are having in last lecture .
Now as we understand in last lecture that most of the chain most of the polymer chains are flexible , and when they are dissolved in solution and they are moved in solution , they actually carry the solvent molecules which are attached to the polymer coil ; they move along with the polymer coil .
So , you can imagine a equivalent sphere width which contains a polymer chain and the solvent molecules as impermeable hard sphere , and for that hard sphere we know that Einstein ’ s equation of viscosity is given by this expression where eta and eta 0 is the viscosities for the suspension and suspension medium which is basically a polymer solution and the solvating medium or the solvent .
Now , it can be easily shown to have this expression ; let me show that .
Phi 2 is the volume fraction which is given by volume of polymer divided by total volume ; this is total volume .
Volume of polymer is given by number of polymer molecules V h ; V h is the volume of one polymer , hydrodynamic volume of one polymer coil .
It is basically the sphere which I showed in last one ; the polymer chain plus the solvent molecules which moves along with the polymer coil and you can imagine an equivalent sphere .
So , the V h is the volume of that sphere divide by total volume is the number of particle which is Avogadro number multiplied by moles of polymer V h by total volume N A .
The number of polymer and the moles of polymers can be expressed by mass of the polymer divided by the molecular rate of the polymer V h by total volume .
This gives m by V N A V h by M ; m by V is the concentration , c concentration in mass per unit volume .
So , we can write this as c by M N a V h .
And eta s p you know if you recollect ; eta s p is eta r minus 1 , eta by eta 0 minus 1 .
So , you can directly write this expression from this .
Now I can rearrange it ; because increasing viscosity is given by limits c tends to 0 eta s p by c which is basically given by N A eta s p by c which is you can write from here , you divide by c and you get this expression .
Now what does it mean ?
It means that intrinsic viscosity is proportional to V h by M ; V h by m is volume by mass of the polymer coil .
This is the volume of a polymer coil one polymer coil and this is the molecular weight ; that means mass of one polymer coil ; that means intrinsic viscosity relates inversely to the density ; it is inverse to the density of the random coil .
So denser the coil volume , the smaller the intrinsic viscosity as we have been discussing earlier that if the coil becomes more denser , then smaller is the size and smaller is the intrinsic viscosity for the same molecular weight .
If the chain has same molecular weight but lower V h lower size for more compact coil which we can imagine for a applicable or which we will get for a branched polymer .
As we discussed for branched polymer if you compare between linear and a branched polymer from same molecular weight , the branch will have more compact volume .
So , it may have much lower hydrodynamic volume per coil .
So , in that case intrinsic viscosity will be smaller .
Now another information this expression gives is that the term intrinsic viscosity multiplied by the molecular weight is given by this which only depend up on the volume of the polymer coil in the solution .
So , intrinsic viscosity does not depend only on the volume ; it depends on inverse of the density .
But if you have intrinsic viscosity multiplied by the molecular weight , the intrinsic viscosity only this term the intrinsic viscosity multiplied M depends only on the hydrodynamic volume .
So , if there are two hydrodynamic chains having same hydrodynamic volume irrespective of the chemical and structural difference , the product of intrinsic viscosity and the molecule would be the same .
If the two polymer coils have same hydrodynamic volume , irrespective of their chemical and structural difference , the product of intrinsic viscosity and molecular weight will be same .
Now just the same information which we discussed we can compare between a branched chain and a linear chain .
These are the yellow ones of the branched of this linear polymer ; imagine this two have same molecular weight .
If this two have same molecular weight obviously if you have branches then it will have more compact structure .
So , hydrodynamic volume will be lower in this case .
So , molecular weight is M ; in this case molecular weight also M .
So , hydrodynamic volume is higher in this case ; hydrodynamic volume is higher in this case .
Segment density of the coil is lower ; segment density is higher .
So , intrinsic viscosity of this will be higher than the intrinsic viscosity of the branched polymer chain have the same molecular and if you divide branch by the linear , the value of the branch intrinsic viscosity of linear one you can get the extent of branching in this polymer coil .
Now we will further treat this expression and see whether we can arrive at an expression which can help us in determining the molecular weight by dilute solution viscometry .
We have not started discussion on molecular weight determination .
So , this title is probably inappropriate at this moment .
So , you can just ignore this title for this moment and just concentrate on the mathematical part of this expression .
We have got this earlier .
So , this was written V h ; now we are writing you can consider this as V h .
So , I am writing this .
Now V h is the volume of the particle .
This is the volume of this particle .
Now remember while discussing the radius of gyration , we discussed that radius of gyration is almost like the radius of that sphere .
So , this radius of gyration would be related proportional to the actual radius of this hydrodynamic polymer coil .
So , the volume V h would be proportional to the R g cube ; volume given by four - third pi r square , r is this r .
Now this r we said it is proportional to the radius of gyration .
If you can recollect our discussion in the definition of radius of gyration , these are very close .
So , we can write that V h is proportional ; this proportionality sign is missing here .
V h is proportional to the radius of gyration to the power 3 and radius of gyration can be written as the expansion factor and radiation gyration for the unpart of chain .
So , we can write that intrinsic viscosity is proportional to ; the proportionality sign is also missing here is V h which is proportional to this term divide by M .
Now , we can remove this proportionality by applying or introducing a constant ; this is a constant .
So , we can write intrinsic viscosity is equals to this term .
So , remember this should be h because we have mentioned h in the last lecture .
So these are all h , V h expansion factor h .
So , this is the expansion factor because of the polymer solvent interaction .
This is expansion happened due to because the polymer coil is in solvent .
We can rearrange this expression and write like this which is just a mathematical rearrangement ; you can write this .
Now if we recollect , this was proportional to n to the power half which is proportional to molecular into half which means three by two divide by m 3 by 2 would be some constant term because this two are proportional .
So , what we are doing here ; this is a constant as I just discussed , this is also constant and we are clubbing these two in another constant and you have the expansion factor and molecular weight to the power half .
These expressions are Flory - Fox equation and remember as we said this expansion factor is for large expansion , it was proportional to n to the power one - tenth .
Remember we just discussed in last lecture which just means this is not exactly , but this is approximately proportional .
So , it is approximately proportional to n into the power 10 .
So , you can now write ; you can express this is in terms of molecular weight and then couple those two and write k is M to power A .
So , this expression we got from the theoretical calculation which we just carried out but it was before this theoretical expression was arrived by Flory Fox , Mark and Houwink has actually arrived to this expression semiempirically by experimentally .
So , this expression is known as Mark - Houwink equation .
This equation later we will use for determining molecular weight by dilute solution viscometry So , please remember this expression where k is constant and a is also constant .
We will learn more about k and a , and we will discuss the solution determination of molecular in solution viscometry or you can now complete that discussion .
So , as I said that Mark - Houwink equation derived before Flory - Fox equation as a empirical equation .
Now k and a are constant as we just discussed while deriving the expression and t s ; that is same that is constant for a given polymer solvent temperature system .
So if you change any of these three polymer solvent and temperature , then k and a value will be changed .
So , this is only constant if you have same polymer and solvent temperature because if you change either of them V h , the coil dimension will change and your gyration radius of the expansion factor will also change .
So , these values also will change .
Normally a lies 0.5 to 0.8 for linear chains and if your very stiff chains like rod - like , then it a can move up to 1 .
But for linear flexible chains , it will be between 0.5 to 0.8 and for theta condition what we have seen earlier for theta condition , what is the value of a s or expansion factor for theta condition efficient ?
It was for one .
S , if this is one , then for theta conditions a value would be 0.5 .
So , it is same as if there was no expansion of the coil due to the presence of the solvent .
Now a increases as the coil expansion occurs in good solvent ; in good solvent the coil expands .
So , the value of expansion factor becomes more than one .
So , a value becomes more than 0.5 .
Now k increases with the value of a for flexibility ; typically you have seen it has been seen that k also increases with the increase in the value of a and it is typically around this range .
a is more informative in polymer ; you will find that a is more probably more important than between these two constant .
Now for branched polymer , obviously , even if even you consider theta condition and put a branched polymer , then the expansion factor will be lower than the one if you compare with a linear polymer .
So , you are a value could be lower 0.5 .
For linear polymer it can never go down below 0.5 but if you have branched polymer it is more compact .
So , the expansion factor will be ; if you compare the expansion factor of unperturbed linear polymer chain it may go down below that below one .
So , the intrinsic viscosity would be smaller as a becomes smaller .
Now , this expression becomes little more complicated when you have copolymers , you are characterizing copolymers .
As I said we will use this expression Mark - Houwink expression when we try to determine the molecular weight ; we will discuss the determination of molecular weight of polymer chain by viscosity method .
Now let us start our very important discussion how to determine the molecular weight and at the beginning what I would like to do I will just give an overview of the techniques which are available and used to determine the molecular weight .
These are the different techniques and what I have done is I have just listed the principles and some of these techniques are absolute techniques ; that means we do not require any calibration by the polymers of no molecular weight .
Actually you can divide these techniques into two types ; one is absolute molecular weight determination where we do not require any calibration curve of priority by known polymer molecular weights .
And there are relative methods where you actually require a calibration curve by known polymer molecular weight where the molecule and the molecular have been determined by these absolute techniques .
We will discuss the principle and the other things the process while we discuss this techniques individually .
So , time being we are not spending much time on these techniques .
What we will do , again this is the continuation of the list we have and we will spend significant of time on the techniques which are used very frequently in the labs like Gel Permeation Chromatography , light scattering technique , dilute solution viscometry and end group analysis and membrane osmomtery .
These first four techniques are based on colligative property , so the principles are similar .
So , if you discuss or understand one of them , the rest will be clear to you and all this gives because colligative property is based on the number of average molecular weight .
So , this all gives number of molecular weight .
Instead of spending more time on this table , which we will discuss in more detail when we discuss the individual techniques , let us move to the actual techniques .
Because we were having the discussion on Mark - Houwink equation , let us start the method or the techniques which uses dilute solution viscometry .
Now we have seen that this is the expression for dilute polymers , the intrinsic viscosity of polymers in dilute polymer solution and what I can find out .
This intrinsic viscosity is k by M .
Now as the technique suggest this is using the dilute solution of viscometry .
So , the molecular weight given is M v where M v is viscosity average molecular weight .
We will just in a minute we deduce what the expression for viscosity average molecular weight .
In dilute polymer solution , we can assume the following reasonably well .
You know this assumption is reasonably okay to do is one ; the eta specific viscosity is given by the summation of the specific viscosity of the individual chains .
Now as you know that radial polymer mixtures , there are numerous polymer chains having different molecular weight .
So in intrinsic , these are the assumptions we are making that specific viscosity can be obtained by summing up the specific viscosity of the individual polymer chain .
Second , a specific viscosity of the individual chains can be obtained by this expression .
Because we know that limit c tends to 0 eta sp by c is your intrinsic viscosity .
So if the solution is very dilute , then we can write eta s p i is c i eta i .
Third is the intrinsic viscosity of i chain is given by k M i a ; that means what we are assuming that k and a values are independent of the molecule .
So , eta s p i is the intrinsic viscosity of n i moles of molecules having molecular weight M i present at a concentration of c i per unit volume .
So , c i can be written as n i is the number of molecule ; M i is the molecular weight of that molecule .
So , this gives you total mass of i molecule divided by volume mass .
So , this gives your concentration in terms of mass by volume .
So , we have these three assumptions and which is reasonably fair if we deal with dilute polymer solution .
So now , we can find out the expression for the intrinsic viscosity for the polymer sample which is the mixture of all the polymer chain which is given by limit c tends to 0 eta specific by c ; eta specific is given by summation of i c .
We can continue to write this is as summation of eta i c i by c .
We can write the value for c i n i M i by V and c is basically summation of c i .
So , we can write n i M i by V .
So I can write , let me write in a separate page .
n i is given by , if I can take out k outside this summation .
Now we can write ; so you get this expression .
This is for ultimately the expression for we started from this intrinsic viscosity and we did this all the steps and finally reached here .
Now intrinsic viscosity ; if you compare this two expressions then we can write this m V is .
So , you get this expression .
So , in the expression of this m V we just found out that it is having the expression of this .
If a is one which we just we discussed it is for highly elongated rod like molecule , then m V would be same as M w .
If a one then it will be n i M i square by n i M i .
So , it will be equals to M w as a value lies between 0.5 to 0.8 ; M w will be M v , M v would be more than M n and less than M w .
Let me write in a fresh paper .
M v is given by as a is between 0.5 to 0.8 M v would lie M n and M w and it will be much more closer towards M w if a is higher ; if the coil expand , it will be more expansion more closer to M w and for highly stiff rods where a is 1 , M v becomes equals to M w .
So now , we know k is intrinsic viscosity is M v by a .
Now we just got the expression for M v which is given here which is the expression for M v .
So , from here if you plot .
So , how to get the value for M v ?
If you know k and a ; if k and a are known , obviously you can find experimentally the value of intrinsic viscosity and then if you know k and a value , then you will be able to find the value for M v .
What happened if k and a are not known ?
Then you can find , you take log eta plot with log M v ; you get log eta is log k plus a log M v .
So , if you plot log of intrinsic viscosity with log of viscosity average molecular weight , the intercept will give you log k and the slope will give you a .
So , what you need to find out ; if you know for experiment or if you from literature in the book , you are fine , you can get and determine experimentally the value for intrinsic viscosity and you can utilize this expression to get the viscosity average molecular weight .
But if you do not know ; somebody has done it before means for unknown sample , the unknown sample this k and a are not listed .
For unknown sample , then how do you determine the viscosity average molecular weight ?
Then what you need to do ; you need to plot log of intrinsic viscosity with many known molecular weight and then you do you do a experimental take five to ten samples and make dilute solutions from that determine the intrinsic viscosity and plot this to get log k and a .
Now the question is here ?
You need to plot log M v ; that is what you need to determine .
If you are plotting here log m v , now you are again targeting M v for the unknown molecules .
So , then you do not know the M v .
This is a calibration curve which you are getting by doing experiments of intrinsic viscosity measurement of many polymer molecular of known molecular weight .
Now known molecular weight can be either M n or M w which you already determined by the absolute techniques .
We will come back and say it again .
If k and a are not known , what you need to do ?
You make , say , 5 solutions or 5 different molecular weight ; M 1 , M 2 , M 3 , M 4 , M5 and then measure the intrinsic viscosity for these eta 1 , eta 2 , eta 3 , eta 4 , eta 5 and then plot log of eta versus log of M and get log of k .
Now actually this is supposed to M v , the expression gives you k is eta is k M v to the power a .
So , ideally you should have M v value for all these samples which you do not have because that is what you are determining .
So , what samples you will use for calibration where M v is much closer to any of the known molecular weight , say , M n and M w .
Now if you have very narrow dispersed polymer , then you can consider M w or M n is same as M v .
If you have very narrow dispersed polymer then M w are very close to M v .
So , you can take those M w ’ s and use here and do the calibration curve .
So if your k and a are not known , you need to have five different molecular weight of that solution where the molecular weights are known by other absolute techniques and the samples should be such that they are very narrowly dispersed .
So , that M n and M w can be equated to the M v .
So , that is the reason it is a relative method ; it is not a absolute method .
You cannot determine M v for a unknown polymer by as such ; you need to have a calibration curve and for doing calibration curve , you need to have 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 known molecular weight narrow dispersed same polymer whose molecular weight you need to get it from the other absolute techniques like osmotic pressure or light scattering techniques .
Then you can determine the viscosity average molecule rate of the unknown sample which k and a is not known in the literature .
So , for all this case we need ; we said that will determine the intrinsic viscosity .
Now how will you determine ?
For a given polymer sample in a solvent for a particular temperature how will you determine , how will you determine eta intrinsic viscosity ?
Eta is given by limit c tends to 0 eta s p by c .
Now if for a dilute solution , the plot of eta s p versus c is linear only till your eta r is less than equals to 2 .
So , if your eta value of the solution is twice 2x the eta 0 maximum , then you can find out that eta s p is linearly related with the concentration term .
So , we can write the eta s p is linearly related to c concentration only till eta r is less than 2 .
So eta s p by c can be written as , this is the slope of that linear relationship between eta s p by c with c and that is only applicable till eta r is less than 2 .
Now this k the slope depends on the molecular rate of polymer ; it is not equal for all the lengths of polymer .
So , we need to find out something else where that constant can be applied to any of the molecular rate of the polymer chains .
So , Huggins found out that k versus eta square is linear and pass through origin ; k is the slope .
So , we can write d eta s p by c by d c ; this is the slope k that is proportional linear .
So , I can put another constant k 1 and eta square because there is no constant term because this passes through the origin .
Now you can integrate this ; you integrate this , you get c is equal to eta 1 .
Now because Huggins has established this relationship , sometimes this k 1 is written as k H .
So , eta s p by c is written as plus k h eta square c .
This is Huggins constant ; this is Huggins equations .
Now this is constant for a particular polymer solvent temperature system .
You change any of this change .
You change any of these three ; polymer solvent or temperature , it will vary ; the value of k H will vary .
It is of course independent of M w of the polymer .
So , now you can use this for the mixture of the polymer or interpolymer distribution so that it can be useful , because it is independent of molecular weight .
Now if the concentration is little higher , we talked about this is only applicable for eta r is less than equals to two if the concentration is higher , then this expression can be expressed like the real expression where plus other constant and so on if eta c is less than much less than one , you can ignore this terms higher term c square onwards terms , then you land up getting the Huggins expression again .
So only in case of dilute solution , you can consider only up to ; these higher terms you can neglect .
k H have value between 0.3 for good solvent to 0.5 for poor solvent .
Now in this case from this Huggins expression or Huggins equation , you only need the value of k H .
If this is known if k H is known , then obviously you can determine intrinsic viscosity by plotting eta s p by c versus c till the c is very dilute ; you know c should not be very high .
So the solution remains very dilute , then you can keep the expression for eta from the intercept and if you know k H , then you can get the expression ; you can get the value of molecular weight directly .
If you know k H , you also will know intrinsic viscosity , then you will know from the expression you can get that molecular weight .
Now alternatively we can use the inherent viscosity which can be expressed and specific viscosity is much lower than 1 .
This expression can be written eta s p minus half eta square .
So , this Huggins equation can now be written as directly eta r is equals to c plus .
So , this gives the similar expression like the Huggins expression but this in terms of the inherent viscosity and this expression this constant is named at the person who has given this ; this is Kramer ’ s equation where K k is k H minus half .
So , it will be a negative quantity .
So , now we have two expressions Huggins equation and Kramer ’ s equation .
So , you can plot eta s p or this term inherent viscosity with respect to c and then from slope and the intercept , you can get the value of intrinsic viscosity .
So , I can plot either eta reduced which is nothing but eta s p by c or we can plot eta inherent which is ln into r by c and we will get .
In case of Kramer that constant is negative we just saw .
In case of Kramer this is negative , so the slope will be negative .
And in case of Huggins this is positive ; the slope will be positive .
So , this will be eta reduced plot for eta reduced and the other one will be plot eta inherent .
So , from this you can get the value of the intrinsic viscosity .
So in summary if we know this Mark - Houwink equation where M v expression we just have seen .
Now using either this Huggins equation or Kramer equation , you can plot either the reduced viscosity or the inherent viscosity with the concentration term to get experimentally the intrinsic viscosity .
So , this is in your hand .
You can make solutions of different concentration and you can measure viscosity of the solvent and viscosity of the solution and from viscosity of the solution and solvent you get relative viscosity and from there you get specific viscosity and from there you get reduced viscosity and inherent viscosity .
So , these are all in your hand .
You can get a viscometer and typically the viscosity is measured by passing using this different viscometer where the solvent and the solution is passed through the capillary where the time is proportional to the viscosity .
So , basically if you measure the time of reflux time of the solution and the solvent from the receiver , you can get the relative viscosity and from there you can get the reduced viscosity and inherent viscosity .
So basically you plot , you make different solution with different concentration and plot ; with this you get the intrinsic viscosity .
So once you know this , if you know k and a , you can use this expression to find out M v .
As you have seen if you know the k H or K k the Huggins constant or the Kramer constant k H or K k , then only from one concentration itself you can get the value of intrinsic viscosity the molecular weight .
And if you do not know this k or a the k H or K k , then the process is to determine some or few or very narrowly dispersed same polymer and get the absolute molecular weight from any other techniques , and because it is suppose has to be very narrow dispersed polymer , you can take any of the M n or M w as equals to M v .
And you find out the intrinsic viscosity for this given polymer and then by plotting log intrinsic viscosity versus log molecular weight , you can get k and a value ; from that you can get this M v .
So with this , we conclude the discussion on determination of molecular weight by viscosity method .
Remember whatever we are doing in this determination there are few precautions you have to take ; you have to make the solution to determine the intrinsic viscosity such that the concentrations of the solutions is very low .
It must be in dilute solution , a very dilute solution region and also you need to remember that relative number in this method , you cannot get a measurement for an unknown polymer as such .
It is not absolute method ; it is a relative method .
So , what we will do in the next lecture we will start discussing about the other methods of determining molecular weight namely M n and M w and other polymer solvent interaction parameters .
We were yesterday talking about reversible inhibition that is those inhibitor molecules which reduce the rate of an enzymatic reaction by reversible interaction with enzyme molecule and after the inhibition is over they can be physically separated and the enzyme can be recovered in its original catalytic functional form .
These reversible inhibitors are often categorized into three major classes based on certain general features and some of the general features which are used to classify them are : One is pattern of binding of the inhibitor to either the enzyme molecule or the enzyme substrate complex or in another words it leads to specific mechanistic steps which are involved in the inhibitory effect .
That means the enzyme reaction rate is modified or rather reduced to a new state in the presence of those inhibitor molecules .
Based on that mechanism then the rate expression has evolved which also has characteristic features and for particular class of inhibitor .
Then one looks at the effect of inhibitor on the Michaelis Menten constant and the maximum reaction velocity of reaction .
A particular class of inhibitor gives you a typical effect on the value of Km or Vm .
Then another feature is the effect on the double reciprocal plot , Lineweaver - Burk plot and the nature of Lineweaver - Burk plot which is influenced as a function of inhibitor concentration will also tell you about the class of a particular inhibitor .
Finally the type of inhibitor also influences the ultimate degree of inhibition .
As I mentioned earlier the degree of inhibition is defined as i = v0 - vi / vo where i is the degree of inhibition and v0 and vi are the enzyme reaction rate at concentration of inhibitor at zero and at some particular concentration i for the enzyme reaction .
Any inhibition pattern is studied on these basic lines and yesterday we had looked at competitive inhibition and to summarize the nature of competitive inhibition the basic mechanistic step was that the inhibitor combines with the enzyme in a manner that prevents substrate binding .
It may occupy the same binding site .
It could also interfere with the binding due to steric hindrances in such a way that the binding of substrate is prevented fully or partially and substrate and the inhibitor are mutually exclusive .
Their effect on the kinetic parameters of the enzyme reaction is just to increase the apparent Michaelis Menten constant .
The maximum reaction velocity remains unchanged .
The inhibition constant that is the reversible binding of enzyme with the inhibitor and the corresponding dissociation constant is equivalent to the concentration of inhibitor that doubles the slope of initial reaction velocity that is inverse double reciprocal plot 1 / v verses 1 / S plot .
If you recall in the case of competitive inhibition we have seen that 1 / vi = Km / Vm ( 1 + I / Ki ) .1 / S + 1 / Vm The Michaelis Menten constant is modified by the amount 1 + I / Ki and therefore the value of Ki is equivalent to that concentration of the inhibitor at which the slope of the double reciprocal plot is double .
That means from the initial slope , the value of slope doubles and that concentration of inhibitor gives you the magnitude of Ki .
Then degree of inhibition for the competitive inhibition also depends upon all the parameters and the expression for degree of inhibition for competitive inhibitor can be written as Km.I / Ki i = { Km ( 1 + I / Ki ) } + S The degree of inhibition depends on substrate concentration , inhibitor concentration and also on Km and Ki .
All the parameters influence the degree of inhibition at any given inhibitor concentration for the competitive inhibitor .
This is what we had discussed yesterday .
Now if we come to the next major class of reversible inhibitor which is a non - competitive inhibitor , the classical feature of a non - competitive inhibitor in terms of binding with the enzyme or the enzyme substrate is that the inhibitor does not influence in any way the substrate binding .
Substrate as well as the inhibitor binds reversibly , randomly and independently at different sites .
That means the binding site on the enzyme molecule for the substrate is different from the binding site for the inhibitor molecule .
The enzyme molecule binds to both ; substrate as well as inhibitor and the resulting ESI complex is functionally inactive .
Therefore one can look at the reaction mechanism as k1 k2 E + S ES E + P k - 1 A classical route involving k1 , k - 1 and k2 .
E + S ES E + P + + I I EI + S ESI The enzyme can also bind to inhibitor giving EI and because the binding site of the substrate is different , EI can again bind to form ESI and the ES can also bind to I to give ESI .
The enzyme substrate inhibitor complex , the triple complex , can be arrived at either from this route or from this route because the binding of substrate and inhibitor do not interfere with each other .
They can bind reversibly , randomly and independently ; there is no interaction within them .
But only thing is that this ESI complex once formed is catalytically inactive and does not lead to product formation .
It is only ES complex which will lead to product formation .
In a simplistic mechanism we notice that we have a dissociation constant Km for the enzyme substrate binding and dissociation constant Ki for the inhibitor binding .
Also we assume that whether the enzyme substrate complex bind to inhibitor or the free enzyme binds to the inhibitor the dissociation constant is identical Ki .
Similarly when substrate binds to EI complex , dissociation constant is Km .
There is no interference by binding of substrate or inhibitor onto the enzyme in their subsequent binding process .
Under such conditions one can write the rate expression for a non - competitive inhibitor as S .
Vm v0 = Km ( 1 + I / Ki ) + S ( 1 + I / Ki ) To simplify , to look at the effect on Km and Vm values , if we divide both the numerator and denominator by ( 1 + I / Ki ) S .
Vm / ( 1 + I / Ki ) v0 = Km + S One can very clearly visualize that the effect of a non - competitive inhibitor is to influence the maximum reaction velocity and maximum reaction velocity is reduced by factor of ( 1 + I / Ki ) whereas the Km value remains unchanged .
There is no effect on the Km value .
In contrast to the competitive inhibitor where the Km value was altered here the Vm value gets altered .
The modified maximum reaction velocity is equal to Vm ’ = Vm / ( 1 + I / Ki ) If you look at into the mechanic concept the total fraction of the enzyme molecule which was originally present for catalytic function has now got distributed into ES , EI and EIS and only a part of it which is in the form of ES is catalytically functional and therefore the maximum reaction velocity which is a function of enzyme concentration is reduced .
So the net effect on the maximum reaction rate is experienced .
It does not influence the K2 value , the turn over number , because as we know Vm = K2.E ’ 0 Here E0 , in the presence of non - competitive inhibitor , corresponds to that fraction of total enzyme which is in the form of ES .
The ESI complex form is functionally inactive and therefore the K2 is not altered .
It is the E0 which is modified or reduced by a factor of 1 + I / Ki .
E0 is a fixed quantity when there is no inhibitor in the reaction .
Once the inhibitor is present the E0 will be distributed into free enzyme , E , ES , EI and ESI .
E0 is not reduced but the effective total concentration of the enzyme , E ’ 0 , which is catalytically functional is reduced and it is only the ES component which is catalytically functional .
In many cases the binding of substrate can influence the catalytic function on the substrate binding .
Binding wise it may be independent .
There are two parts in the active site .
One is the binding process which is not influenced which is elaborated by our dissociation constant .
The binding part of the active site is demonstrated by the dissociation constant .
The second part which is demonstrated is the catalytic function which is given by K2 , the turn over number .
That can be influenced by binding of the inhibitor .
Turn over number is unaffected here .
In the case of the non - competitive inhibition , the turn over number will be unaffected as far as the kinetic parameter is concerned .
But it can influence the catalytic capacity of the enzyme molecule in total .
This is where the question comes that when the substrate and the inhibitor both are bound it influences the whole molecule in such a way that catalytic function is lost .
It is a dead end complex and then the binding site on the enzyme which is bound by the substrate is not able to give the product .
But when I say K2 , I am referring K2 in the sense of the original catalytic function which was present , which is retained and only in the presence of a bound inhibitor on the inhibitor binding site , the catalytic function is lost .
The double reciprocal plot in the presence of non - competitive inhibitor is given as 1 / v = Km / Vm ( 1 + I / Ki ) .1 / S + 1 / Vm ( 1 + I / Ki ) In the case of a non - competitive inhibitor both the slope as well as intercept will undergo a change and both this slope and intercept has increased by a magnitude 1 + I / Ki and therefore if you look at the pattern of the Lineweaver Burk plot you get an increasing concentration of I .
Let us assume that this is I = 0 and some values of I as I1 and I2 .
The slope and the intercept are both increasing by a magnitude of 1 + I / Ki .
Therefore one can determine the value of Ki as we saw in the case of competitive inhibitor by a secondary plot .
That means either you determine slope or intercept at different inhibitor concentration and make a plot between I and slope or intercept .
You will get a straight line because slope will be equal to Slope = Km / Vm ( 1 + I / Ki ) Therefore one can determine the value or magnitude of Ki either by plotting the slope verses the inhibitor concentration or by intercept .
Either way one can determine and that can give you the magnitude of inhibition constant .
The third category of the reversible inhibitor is un - competitive inhibition .
In this category of reversible inhibitors the inhibitor binds reversibly to the enzyme substrate complex .
It doesn ’ t have any mechanism to recognize the free enzyme .
Only when the substrate is bound to the enzyme it can bind to the enzyme substrate complex and after binding of the inhibitor the ES complex becomes an inactive complex and the inhibitor does not bind to the free enzyme .
km k2 E + S ES E + P + I ki ESI ES can bind to inhibitor giving you ESI .
This is the dissociation constant Ki , classical Km and K2 .
The inhibitor can bind to only to the ES complex and does not bind to the free enzyme .
Such situations are very rare as far as the unisubstrate reactions are concerned .
Very few cases , almost rare cases are there where one notices this kind of un - competitive inhibition .
Most of these cases are usually related to bisubstrate reactions particularly because you notice here that the inhibitor binds after the substrate is bound .
So there is a sequence of binding .
In cases only where there is ordered sequence of binding of the ligands , the un - competitive inhibition is feasible .
In cases where the binding is random , that means the inhibitor and substrate can bind randomly without any sequence , the mechanism of un - competitive inhibition is very rare .
The idea of un - competitive inhibition has been very , very useful in understanding the reaction mechanism for bi substrate reactions .
When we look at bisubstrate reactions we notice that this inhibition pattern gives you lot of information about the sequence of binding of the substrate in the case of a bisubstrate reaction .
In the case of an un - competitive inhibition the reaction velocity can be written as S .
Vm v = Km + S ( 1 + I / Ki ) To bring it to the same format of Michaelis Menten equation , if you can divide both numerator and denominator by ( 1 + I / Ki ) S .
Vm / ( 1 + I / Ki ) v = Km / ( 1 + I / Ki ) + S Km ’ = Km / ( 1 + I / Ki ) ; Vm ’ = Vm / ( 1 + I / Ki ) Both the parameters are reduced by a factor of ( 1 + I / Ki ) and the double reciprocal plot in the presence of un - competitive inhibitor will be 1 / v = Km / Vm.1 / S + 1 / Vm ( 1 + I / Ki ) Therefore you will notice that the un - competitive inhibitor does not change the slope .
The slope remains unaltered but the intercept is increased .
This is your intercept and the intercept 1 / Vm on the y axis is increased by a factor of ( 1 + I / Ki ) .
The typical pattern of an un - competitive inhibitor looks like parallel lines where the slope doesn ’ t change but the intercept value 1 / Vm is changed .
It is increased by a factor 1 + I / Ki .
If you make a secondary plot of 1 / Km ’ verses I , 1 / Km ’ = 1 / Km + I / Km.Ki you will get the value of Ki .
In all these cases by following a typical pattern that is by understanding the reaction mechanism , the binding of the inhibitor and substrate to the enzyme and their interaction between each other one can really arrive at a rate expression .
One can also look at the double reciprocal equation , Lineweaver Burk equation , make a double reciprocal plot , see the nature of double reciprocal plot and identify the nature of inhibitor which we are talking about by understanding these .
In many cases we will also notice that the actual inhibitor does not follow a very typical pattern and very often we end up with a profile that intersects neither on the y - axis nor on the x - axis and intersects somewhere in the middle point .
Such a situation can be considered something away from the ideality , a kind of mixed type of inhibition .
One of the most commonly observed mixed type of inhibition is what we call as linear mixed type inhibition .
This is a typical case of a non - competitive inhibition .
In non - competitive inhibition we considered the binding of the inhibitor to either the substrate or the free enzyme .
In that case we assumed , one basic factor , that the dissociation constant for binding of the inhibitor to the enzyme and the binding of the inhibitor to the enzyme substrate complex is identical .
But in many cases this may not be so .
The dissociation constant for binding of inhibitor to enzyme may be different from the dissociation constant for inhibitor binding to ES complex and there might be an interaction factor of alpha .
In such a case ES going to E plus P .
E binds to I with the dissociation factor of Ki to form EI .
ES binds to the inhibitor with inhibition constant of a Ki to form ESI and substrate binds to EI .
If the inhibition constant for this is Km and if the system has to come to equilibrium , then the equilibrium constant for reaching ESI from either side must be identical and this inhibitor constant will also become a Km .
km E + S ES E + P + + I I ki aki akm EI + S ESI In most cases it so happens that the inhibition constant for binding of inhibitor to the free enzyme or binding of inhibitor to the enzyme substrate complex are not identical as assumed in the non - competitive inhibition and therefore the presence of inhibitor on the enzyme changes Km also by the same factor a Km and in such cases the rate expression becomes modified .
Vm . S vi = Km / ( 1 + I / Ki ) + S ( 1 + I / a Ki ) Km ( 1 + I / Ki ) ( 1 + I / a Ki ) 1 / vi = .
+ Vm S Vm For cases where a &gt ; 1 you will get a profile in which the double reciprocal plot of 1 / S Vs 1 / v at different inhibitor concentrations will intersect at a point on the left hand side of the y - axis .
If you consider the slopes and the intercepts of this plot , a replot of the slope will give you Ki .
If you replot the modified intercept as a function of inhibitor concentration it will give you a Ki and therefore value of a can be determined .
That means magnitude by which the dissociation constant of binding of inhibitor is modified can be determined .
Such profiles are indicative of modification of dissociation constant as a function of substrate binding in the presence of non - competitive inhibitors .
Such cases are very commonly found and in most of the practical cases they are not usually ideal type of inhibition patterns .
They are mixed type of inhibition patterns and mixed inhibition pattern are attributed to modification in the dissociation constant as they are obtained .
Another general feature which gives you the properties or the characteristic of any type of inhibition pattern is degree of inhibition .
If you recall from all the rate expressions that we wrote for the different types of inhibition pattern i = v0 - vi / v0 For non - competitive inhibitors , if you substitute the rate expression for the inhibitor and uninhibited reaction for the non - competitive reactions the value of I will be I / Ki + I which indicates that the degree of inhibition is independent of substrate concentration , unlike in the case of competitive inhibition where increasing substrate inhibition can significantly decrease the degree of inhibition .
That means the extent by which the rate of the enzyme catalyzed reaction is reduced by the inhibitor can be reduced by increasing the substrate concentration in relation to inhibitor concentration .
In the case of non - competitive inhibition whatever be the concentration of substrate , it does not influence the degree of inhibition and it is totally dependent on the concentration of inhibitor and the Ki .
In the case of un - competitive inhibitor the degree of inhibition is S.I / Ki ( Km + S ) .
( 1 + I / Ki ) The degree of inhibition will rise from S = 0 when there is no reaction to a limiting value of 1 + I / Ki at very high value of substrate concentration .
When the substrate concentration becomes very high , the degree of inhibition will be 1 + I / Ki but it will depend like competitive inhibition on all the parameters , the substrate concentration , inhibitor concentration , Ki and Km .
In the case of mixed inhibition , the degree of inhibition will be largely dependent upon the magnitude of a .
The mixed inhibition is a special case of non - competitive inhibition where otherwise substrate concentration does not influence the degree of inhibition .
Because the binding sides are different and they don ’ t interfere with each other but in the case of mixed inhibition , the magnitude of inhibition will be dependent on the ratio of dissociation constant for free enzyme and enzyme substrate complex with the inhibitor .
a will determine the magnitude of the degree of inhibition .
So these are some of the typical categories of inhibition pattern which are commonly noted and they have a key role to play in understanding the mechanism of variety of complex reactions particularly the bi - substrate reactions .
The inhibition patterns obtained for bisubstrate reactions gives you lot of information about the binding pattern of different substrate or the sequence of binding of the different substrate in the case of a multisubstrate reaction .
In the case of single substrate reaction , that is what we have been talking so far , the life is simple because there is only one substrate and we are concerned with the binding of the substrate .
In the case of bisubstrate reactions we have much more possibilities , much more types of mechanistic approaches that are feasible and they are taken into account .
When we say very high substrate concentration , S &gt ; &gt ; Km and we are talking of zero order design and then the degree of inhibition at very high substrate concentration will be significantly very high because then it will reach the limiting value of 1 + I / Ki .
Km becomes K and S gets cancelled and then degree of inhibition will be I / Ki. ( 1 + I / Ki ) .
It reaches a limiting value of 1 + I / Ki .
But otherwise at low substrate concentration that will be some where in between zero and that value .
Another way is to look at the inhibition pattern in a generalized way rather than specific cases .
If you look at a very generalized scheme of inhibition patterns kES E + S ES E + P kEI kESI EI ESI kES If you consider each of the reversible steps , we are not here really concerned with the irreversible step because that determines the rate of the reaction , the interaction of the reversible step the dissociation constant for this step is KES , this is the KEI , this is KESI and this is also KES .
In the three different cases that we talked about for the type of inhibition , in the case of competitive inhibition magnitude of KESI will tend to infinity .
KES and KEI will have definite magnitude .
That means the enzyme can bind either to inhibitor or to a substrate and KES and KEI will have definite magnitude but the KESI either will be infinity and that is the typical case of a competitive inhibitor .
In the case of a non - competitive inhibitor KESI will be equal to KEI .
That means these two dissociation constants are identical .
In the case of mixed inhibition they are different by a factor a and in the case of un - competitive inhibition the magnitude of KEI is infinity or rather tends to infinity .
That means the inhibitor cannot bind to the enzyme .
The three cases are typical examples of three extreme situations of the inhibitor binding .
In the competitive inhibitor the binding of the inhibitor to ES complex is not feasible and the dissociation constant is infinity .
In the case of non - competitive inhibition it can bind to either E or ES and the dissociation constant is identical .
In the case of mixed inhibition they are not identical but they have a magnitude and both are related by ratio of a and which determines the degree of inhibition .
In the case of un - competitive inhibition , the dissociation constant for the binding of inhibitor to the free enzyme approaches to infinity .
That means binding to free inhibitor is not feasible .
With that view I think we would like to look at the other bisubstrate reactions subsequently and we will stop at this point .
Welcome to this lecture fourteen of the course on polymer chemistry .
In this fourteenth lecture I plan to you know continue the discussion we had on the thermodynamics of radical polymerization , which is valid for other chain growth polymerizations as well .
We talk about the molecular weight distribution and we will talk about different processes , different polymerization processes for radical polymerization .
Let us just recap couple of minutes on the topics we covered in last lecture .
We talked about the dependence on temperature , dependence of rate of polymerization and molecular weight on the temperature for radical polymerization initiated by different mechanism , thermal initiator , photochemical initiator and redox initiator .
We in summary we knew that the initiation process is more slower and had the highest activation energy for thermal process .
And also E d for thermal was higher than E d for redox than E d or a photochemical process .
Now , you also remember in R p term there was plus half E d term on the numerator and in case of X n there was minus half E d term in the activation energy .
So , between this three processes thermal process redox process and photochemical processes .
Thermo , thermal process because E d is highest it was getting effected by the temperature rise .
The increase in the rate of polymerization was much higher in case of polymerization initiated by a thermal initiator , then redox initiator and then photo chemical initiator .
In case of molecular weight , again similar order , the molecular was getting dropped or reduced with increasing temperature mostly for thermal initiated reaction then for redox reaction and for photo chemical reaction because E d is actually 0 .
It was actually going up mildly .
In case of photochemical reaction it actually gets slight increase in molecular weight with increase in temperature .
And we were talking about the T c ceiling temperature and the equilibrium concentration of free monomer and we got this two expression .
And we from this expression we know that every temperature ; typically what we do in a in lab you actually start a reaction say in a beaker or in a round bottom flask and keep in a oil bath maintained or in some other maintained in a constant temperature .
Typically we do reaction polymerization reaction as well in a isothermal condition you know .
Now , each temperature you can consider , your reaction temperature you can consider as a ceiling temperature .
The equilibrium value of the free monomer concentration at that temperature determined by this value , del H p and del S p .
So , that reaction at the temperature will continue till the free monomer concentration reach to the equilibrium value of the free monomer concentration related to that temperature .
And typically , for the monomers which we know undergo polymerization process , this equilibrium value of the free monomer concentration is very low .
So , we consider we assume that the polymerization is easy and polymerization undergo the monomers undergo almost quantity polymerization or convert almost nearly hundred percent .
If we increase the temperature of your reaction then what happens , M e goes up .
If you do a higher reaction at higher temperature then equilibrium concentration comes goes up that means your polymerization reaction stop at a higher free monomer concentration .
So , if you choose to do in a higher temperature then you will always land up in a higher amount of unreacted monomer even if your reaction is complete or reached equilibrium .
And if you keep on increasing the temperature , one temperature will come where that equilibrium concentration is equals to the free monomer concentration your know pure pure monomer concentration .
That means you can never polymerize at that temperature or beyond that temperature , which is 61 degree for methyl alpha methyl styrene we just talked about .
69 degree the free equilibrium concentration of the equilibrium concentration the free monomer alpha methyl styrene was equal to the pure monomer concentration .
So , at 61 degree or beyond 61 degree you cannot at all polymerize alpha methyl styrene .
As we can see that the T c value depends or the relation between T c and M e depends on the values of del H and del S p .
As I discussed at the last part of my lecture last lecture that delta is between polymer and monomer is basically change in entropy due to the translation motion vibration or rotational entropies and the rotational and vibration entropies of the monomer lost due to polymerization is actually gained in polymer .
So , they do not take part or contribute too much in the delays value of polymerization , is basically that translational entropy drop for the monomers and which practically does not depend on the monomer structure .
So , you will see that del S value is more or less more or less same for most of the monomers .
But del H value will change as we were discussing in last lecture and that will depend upon the amount of stabilization which could be due to resonance or inductive effective or by hyper conservation or by the inter monomer complexes .
If more stabilization means lower value of del H which means lower value of T c and the higher the strain , that means higher is the energy of the polymer again the lower is the magnitude of the del H value .
Now , let us consider or let us compare few monomers and their del S .
Now , del S and del G 0 .
So , let us compare between this two values .
Now , del S del H in this case is for pure monomer .
Pure monomer is getting converted to a pure polymer which is completely amorphous or slightly crystalline .
Where in case of del S a one molar solution , it could be either of this two , you have to pure monomer is converted into pure polymer which is either completely crystalline or slightly amorphous , del S you can also consider from pure to pure or a one molar solution of the monomer to a one molar solution of the polymer repeat unit .
Now , this context you can appreciate that del H value does not depend on the concentration of the monomer whereas , del S value does depend .
del S value is dependent on the concentration of the monomer .
Now , let us compare the values between few monomers and see whether how the monomer structure contribute to the values of , now the simplest monomer is ethylene and in case of ethylene this is from a pure gas to a polymer solid polymer .
This is 93 kilo g per mole and this is 155 , compare this with this vinyl acetate .
Now , this value is quite high .
This will be higher from any other because he was talking about this is a gas phase reaction .
The gas gaseous monomer is getting transferred to a polymer .
So , obviously drop in entropy will be much higher , these are negative numbers .
Sorry , so this will be much higher .
When you talk about the solution phase then this values will be similar .
This is minus 88 minus 110 , acrylonitrile minus 76 minus 109 , methyl acrylate 78 , M M A minus 56 , propane minus 84 , one butyne minus 84 , isobutylene minus 48 , two more styrene minus 73 and alpha methyl styrene minus 35 .
This is minus 100 , minus 104 , 121 .
Now , you can see that this del H more or less same .
Now , as I said that this will be definitely higher because you are talking about a gas phase reaction or gaseous molecules is converted to a solid whereas , this case it is all liquid monomer you are talking about .
Now , let us compare between first styrene and alpha methyl styrene .
Obviously this alpha methyl styrene have a much lower del H value .
Now , that is because this polymer made from this one one substituted alkynes are going to generate when this five one this s p 2 is converted to s p 3 they are going to give lot of strain .
If this alpha methyl styrene is converted to a polymer obviously because of this presence of this groups the polymer will be much more strained compared to the monomer which is a planer molecules .
There is no strain of these groups .
So , this happens for most of the one one substituted alkynes .
Resulting polymers is have much higher strain compared to if there was no such bulky groups .
So , as a result alpha methyl styrene has much lower del H value compared to the styrene .
The monomer stabilization is more or same between styrene and alpha methyl styrene .
Similar case for M M A , M M A also a one one substituted and same logic can apply here because these are resulting a strain polymer the del H actually .
The magnitude of del H comes down .
You can compare between the values between M A and M M A .
If we compare between M A and M M A they are very close .
They are close , but M M A is having much lower because in case of one one substituted the strain is much more compared to if have a only one substituted monomer .
So , a polymer resulting from M M A will be much more strained compared to a polymer from just methyl acrylate .
If you compare between say propyne and acrylonitrile propyne and acrylonitrile , so if you C H 3 and C N .
Obviously resulting polymers which have similar strain .
So , it determine the del H value determined by the stabilization of the this double bond .
And this case presence of electron withdrawing C N group this will be more stabilized .
So , that value of acrylonitrile polymerization will be lower , so that 76 compared to 84 .
So , anything you do to stabilize the double bond it will lower the magnitude of the del H p .
If you do anything which will increase the strain in the resulting polymer that will also reduce the decrease in the value of del H .
And as decrease in the value of del H which means thermodynamic feasibility will also comes down .
We can compare between say one butyne and one tribu butyne .
Obviously one tribu butyne has much more stabilization .
So , it will have much lower del H value .
If you if you compare between the acrylic acid and say acrylonitrile and acrylic acid .
Actually can form hydrogen bonding between the molecules which actually stabilizes the molecules lower compared to be when it get converted to polymer .
If its compared polymers this groups cannot line up to form hydrogen bonding .
So , the hydrogen bonding in acrylic acid polymer is much lower compared to acrylic acid monomer , which means del H value will be lower for acrylic acid compared to say acrylonitrile .
So , we talked about the stabilization of the monomer due to resonance , inductive effect or by hydrogen bonding or dipro interaction between the monomers and increase in the strain behavior of the resulting polymer , which all this factors are against thermodynamic feasibility because the del H value comes down .
Now , the values for tetrafluoroethylene is very high extremely high del H value which is is very difficult to is actually 163 , trifluoroethylene is 163 .
Now , that is very high , it is very difficult to explain .
It could be due to that resulting polymers have because because have a strong association .
So , this actually goes down because chlorines are induced lot dipole movement .
So , there could be a attractive interaction between the polymer molecule .
And in this case that might go down with could results in the increase in the magnetitude of the del H that is one way to explain the high value of del H of high value of magnetitude of del H in case of trifluoroethylene to poly tetrafluoroethylene tetrafluoroethylene to poly tetrafluoroethylene .
Now , this value of del H is also important because that dictate you the exothermicity of the reactions .
And if you have some knowledge about the exothermicity then you can actually control your , you can take out the the heat generated .
If the heat is , you cannot effectively remove the heat which is getting generated by this exothermic polymer reaction then it will accumulate and it will increase the temperature local temperature .
It will increase the reaction rate and decrease the molecular weight in a uncontrolled way .
So , having a knowledge of del H is very important for a chemical engineer .
So , that it he can design a process whereby he can effectively remove the heat generated due to the polymer reaction so that reaction remain isothermal during the polymerization process .
So , this alpha methyl styrene has a minimum of del H value .
Of course , if you go back and see this one if this is low for a given M e , this will be lower because this more or less same .
So , if it this goes down T c also goes down .
If you consider this as a pure monomer , if you fix this concentration pure monomer as this goes down T c goes down .
So , which means that for a pure monomer T c is much lower for alpha methyl styrene compared to a styrene which means that alpha methyl styrene cannot be polymerized .
Whereas , molecule like styrene can be easily polymerized to a very low equilibrium value of free monomer in the mixture .
Now , we have talked about that one one substituted disubstituted monomers also difficult to polymerize .
We talked about in the initial lectures when we introduced the radical polymerization about five six lectures back .
For example , if you consider say maleic anhydride , stilbene or say one two simply one two dichloroethylene .
Now , this this monomers have quite significant value of del H , for say for maleic anhydride this is about minus 59 kilojoule per mole , which means it is not the the fact maleic anhydride is very difficult to polymerize .
It is not due to its magnitude its value of del H polymerization .
Now , what is the reason that this monomers are difficult to polymerize ?
That is because of you if you have say polymer , a monomer like this where you have substituted one two substituted and you have a radical , if radical approaching this double bond which gets very restricted because of this substitutions .
What is the radical ?
It is generates when it propagate at the end is basically C H to Y C H to C H Y and so on .
This is the radical is get generated this is the propagating radical .
Now , when this has to further take part in polymerization it has to approach this monomer .
Now , that approach becomes very sterically hindered because of presence of all this one one substitution .
And that is the reason this is very difficult and and that is why this reactions are very difficult to carry out .
Now , that so we talked about the T c and the values of del H and del S .
The R p and X n the molecular weight can be also dependent on the pressure as well , though it is not that significant as temperature .
If the change in d R p says del V star by R T , we can write similarly , activation energy in case of temperature .
You can write activation volume in case of pressure depending up on the value of this activation .
Activation volume is the change in volume from either monomer goes from monomer state to transition state .
If the volume is lower in transition state then del V will be negative .
If the volume of the transition state is higher than the monomer volume then del V activation volume will be positive .
If this is positive then rate of polymerization will go up with temperature and if its negative if it is negative then it will go down .
You can get it from this expression and it is not very significant .
We , the effect of pressure is not that significant for addition polymerization .
And it seldom practice the in the increase in rate of polymerization can be achieved much easily then by increasing the temperature than increasing the pressure .
When you increased your temperature as much as possible even if you do not get a appreciable polymerization rate then people actually increase the polymerization increase the pressure to get a higher polymerization rate .
Now , let us talk about , we will not spend too much time on the effect of the pressure on the rate of polymerization and molecular weight because it is not very significant as I said .
That effect of temperature is much more significant .
So , you can if you want to increase the polymerization rate you can do it much easier way by increasing the temperature .
If you run out of the option of increasing temperature then people try to increase the pressure to increase the rate of polymerization .
Now , let us talk about the molecular weight distribution in case of radical polymerization .
Now , again in case of radical polymerization , it is little complicated because the molecular weight forms during defined times of polymers are different .
If you recollect the value for say your X n say this is your average degrees of polymerization for a thermal initiated polymerization .
Now , with time the value of M and I changes .
And changes means decrease , the mono monomer is converted to polymers .
The monomer consistent drops as well as the initiator concentration drop .
But the drop in initiator concentration is much more compared to drop in monomer concentration .
That means the molecular weight is more compared to the molecular weights which were getting generated before .
So , at if you consider these expressions with time goes molecular concentration the monomer drops so as the concentration of the initiator .
Now , the drop in I is much sharper compared to drop in M concentration of M , which means that X n the average degrees of polymerization or the molecular weight increases with time .
So , which means that the molecular distribution if you consider the entire reaction is very complicated because at any instantaneous time the the molecular weight is different .
If you talk about the molecular at the beginning of the reaction , that is quite different than the molecular weight of the polymers which are at the end of the reaction .
One more fundamental difference in case of radical polymerization with the step growth polymerization , I spent some time in lecture probably couple of lecture back .
That in case , of step growth polymerization step growth polymerization the polymer is considered the entire mass .
You start with a monomer you complete the polymerization reaction .
You consider the entire reaction mixture is the polymer , which includes monomers dimmer oligomers and high polymers high molecular weight polymers .
So , that entire mixture is your polymer sample .
So , the P D I you got one plus P which is for the entire polymer which includes small molecules as well as the high molecular weights .
So , how did we get that X n bar remember X n bar was the number of molecules at t is equal to 0 and number of by divided by molecules at end of the polymerization .
We considered all the numbers all the molecules present in at the end of the polymerization which includes monomer dimmer oligomer and everything .
So , which which are considering the small molecules also as a part of polymers and we are getting the polydispersity of 1 plus 3 .
We discusses that during the polymers there could be cyclic reaction formation or the side reaction for which small molecular weight generate which which result in higher P D Ivalue of higher than 2 .
But in case if you getting a P D I value is one point less than 2 for a polymers which you have taken out from the solution which means that the low molecular samples which might have left in the solution .
So , you are getting the polymer precipitate from your reaction mixture devoid of the small molecules .
So , basically you were narrowing your distribution .
So , you are getting less than 2 value if you have if you have a less than 2 value .
Now , in case of radical polymerization how do we define radical polymerization how do you define the X n is the total total number of monomers reacted , I hope it is all visible this is not very sharpen , by total number of polymer molecules .
Now , these are high molecular weight polymers these are high molecular weight polymers which you isolate after the reactions .
So , this does not contain the unreacted monomer .
So , that is the fundamental difference between X n in case of radical polymerization and in X n in case of step growth polymerization .
Now , in in case of step growth polymers X n is considered at the end of the reaction .
Where in case of radical polymerization X n varies each time the dead polymer chains are forming .
So , X n will vary with the time .
What is the value of X n for radical chain polymerization ?
We will not go into very details into derivation .
Say , at low conversion that means at the beginning of the reaction low conversion X n bar is given by 1 by 1 minus P X w n given by 1 plus P 1 minus P and X w bar X n bar P D I given by 1 plus p .
Now , these are for for case if one polymer is formed from one kinetic chain which means termination by disproportionation or by transfer this is apply to this .
Now , this case P is probability that the propagating radical will continue to propagate and build polymer .
P is not the conversion unlike step growth P is not a conversion here .
P is a probability that a propagating radical will continue to propagate that means continue to react with monomer .
It should be given by the ratio of rate of propagation with rate of propagation plus rate of termination plus rate of transfer .
So , a radical a kinetic chain or a propagating radical can undergo three reaction it can again reactive with the monomer and propagate , it can terminate , it can transfer .
What is the probability , is the probability given by the rates rate of propagation divided by total rates which is summation of propagation plus termination plus transfer .
Now , in case for high polymers for high molecular weight polymers high molecular weight polymers again the probability is always the probability of propagation is higher because that is why it is propagating P also tends to 1 .
Because , it is making high polymer high molecular weight polymer that means it is undergoing more times of propagating reaction than a terminating reaction or a transfer reaction which means probability is close to 1 .
Now , if for for a polymer getting for polymers getting terminated by combination that means one polymer is getting formed from two kinetic chain .
Obviously , the distribution will be the narrower and the molecular weight will be higher .
So , X n is 2 by instead of 1 by 1 P is 2 by 1 p and X w is 2 plus P 1 minus P .
So , P D I is 2 plus P by 2 .
So , this these are remember this at low conversion we are talking about reaction has just started .
Reaction has not progressed too much so the concentration of monomer and concentration of initiator has not changed much .
So , ration of monomer by I to the power half is this ration has not changed much , at low conversion it will not change much .
So , the molecular weight , the average number of degrees of polymerization the weight average degrees of polymerization and the P D I is given by this expressions .
I am not going in detail in derivation of this process is complicated process .
Whereas , P is given the probability of the propagation radical will continue to propagate and build polymer which is R p divided R p plus R t and are transfer , where if the polymer is terminated by combination reaction than this gives by this .
And as I said for high molecular weight polymer P is 1 .
So , the P D I value will be between this is 1.5 to the case where we have termination by this propagation of transfer this 2 .
So , this is expected that at low conversion the polydispersity will between 1.5 to 2 .
Now if the reaction continues the , this value changes and is actually it is become higher because the drop in as I said drop in initiator concentration is much faster compared to drop in monomer concentration .
So , the chain length the degrees of polymerization goes up .
So , if you consider the total polymerization so obliviously , the broadness will be much higher .
The reaction , the polymers made at the begin will be lower molecular weight comparatively lower molecular weight .
And have if you increase the temperature .
if you increase the time the polymer molecular weight will be higher and higher .
So , you have a much more broader polymer distribution .
So , if you at the end of the polymerization if you consider the M w by M n value will be quite high and its typically between 2 to 5 .
You understand that a low conversion it is , it was between 1.52 to 2 , but at the temperature as the time goes up the polymer molecular weights increases increases .
So , that distribution actually goes up .
Starting from low molecular weight at the beginning to high molecular weights at the at the end thE distribution goes up .
So , you typically the value of P D I comes around 2 to 5 .
And if there are gel effect effect like gel effect and all this things were molecular weight shoots up at the end because the reason we talked about in the last class it could end up a P D I value of 5 to 10 .
If there are gel effect then what happen you know that branching might happened and if branching happen between or the which results from chain transfer two polymer .
If intermolecular chain transfer happen then the P D I goes up further .
For inter intra polymer chain transfer there is no change in molecular weight or molecular weight distribution either .
So , if the there are branching happening because of inter molecular chain transfer as gel effect then P D I goes up and it could be as high as 20 to 50 .
Basically , these are not the polymers you want you want polymers which are as narrower as possible .
So , that is why you would like to avoid this gel effect and and branching and and so on .
So , that you can get narrower and this is the most typical values of P D I you get from a normal polymerization radical polymerization reaction .
Now , what , I will talk about that we talked about the effect of temperature , thermodynamics of polymer , different molecular weight distribution .
Now , talked about how the polymers are done you know .
We talked about all the theory and principle behind molecular weights rates and all this .
Now , the practical part how the monomers are usually polymerized in a in a industry scenario or in the lab .
There could be several processes .
You can do the polymerization only with a monomer and we call it a bulk polymerization .
You can dissolve the monomer in a solvent and do the polymerization then it is named as solution polymerization .
You can disperse the monomers in aqueous phase and do the polymerization , you call this suspension polymerization .
You can do it in a disperse dispersed resulting polymer the produced polymer could be dispersed in organic solvent and you can continue the polymerization as the polymers remain in disperse .
We call that as a dispersion polymerization .
And you can do the polymerization in emulsion as well .
We talk about of each of this brief .
We will spend most time on emulsion polymerization and so let us start about the bulk polymerization .
As I said is the most simple or the simplest polymerization .
You have to take the monomer and a initiator which is soluble in the monomer .
So , you take the monomer you dissolve the initiator and heat the monomer to start the or to initiate the reaction .
And obviously , what is advantage here ?
Advantage is that we have seen that the reaction polymer polymer reaction rate as well as the molecular weight goes up with increase in monomer concentration , which is not true for increasing initiator concentration for initiator increase in initiator concentration rate goes up , but the molecular weight comes down .
If you remember that discussion we had just few few minutes .
But monomer actually , if you increase the monomer both the reaction rate and the molecular weight goes up and this is the maximum concentration you can do .
You can get maximum concentration monomer if you do in a pure state , so monomer concentration is high .
So , rate of polymerization molecule is high and because you are not using any other chemical solvents or other things this gives you high purity polymers and gives you minimum contamination of the product .
And that can be applied in optical applications like C D E and you know other things where you require very clean polymers .
Obviously , this has lot of disadvantages .
For example , because your concentration is very high even at low concentration even at low conversion the viscosity goes up because the medium viscous if the polymer is viscosity goes up .
And as the viscosity goes up you cannot start the reaction medium very effectively and if you cannot start you cannot dissipate the heat generated due to exothermic polymerization .
And as a result what happened , you there is a local heat generation which actually can degrade your polymers which actually can degrade the polymer molecules and can generate coloration in your polymers .
So , viscosity becomes high and stirring become difficult .
And at the end of the polymer also polymerization also , if the viscosity of the resulting you are your final polymer is very high then processing also becomes very difficult .
As I know as we know that high monomer gives high reaction rate .
So , heat generation is high rate and as a result local heat formation takes place coloration and degradation takes place .
So , what is done it is still done ?
It is still utilized for say making styrene , poly styrene , poly methyl acrylate , poly vinyl chloride .
Typically , what is done you start the reaction and keep it at low conversion so that build up is not too high not unmanageable .
Then stop the reaction take out the polymer and restart the reaction again .
So , that you can get high molecular weight , high rate of polymerization without building very high viscosity .
So , you have to do actually stop starts stop start stop reaction where you start the reactions stop at low conversion and then you stop and take the polymer out .
Another strategy is taken for making sheets and all this things that you make a pre - polymer which is not very high molecular weight .
You make a p polymer so the viscosity is not high and then that pre - polymer is poured into a mold in this case sheet .
And then you you want to get the polymer in a final form of a sheet .
So , you pour that pre - polymer into the sheet and then without starting you do the reaction .
So , the reaction rate will be faster and high molecular weight produced and it will you do not need to process it .
It will , it will become like a sheet .
So , you do not you are not aiming for processing this thing or you are not aiming for for heat management all this things .
You are not targeting that .
You are taking this pre - polymer putting in a sheet type mold and then finishing the polymerization .
You actually , gel effect is a beneficial for this thing .
So , that you can make a high molecular weight and reaction get faster and you get the final formed final polymer in terms of a sheet .
So , these are the things these are strategies are applied for in industry for using bulk polymerization .
We move to solution polymerization where you have require monomer solvent and a soluble solvent soluble initiator .
In this case , you require initiator to be in the solvent and free radical kinetic normal can be applied .
It could be homogeneous , if the polymer formed remain in in the solution it will be heterogeneous .
If the polymer is insoluble and precipitate out once it forms and once it precipitate outs it can form powder or granular .
So , sometimes this this polymerization is called powder or granular polymerization .
For example , acrylonitrile in bulk or acrylonitrile in water in this case , it should be water .
If you start polymerization acrylonitrile in water , poly acrylonitrile is not solvable in water , so its precipitated out you get acrylonitrile powder or granular .
Obviously , advantage the advantage disadvantage which we had for your bulk polymerization .
In this case , you do not have those problems because you are doing in a solution then heat heat transfer can takes place efficiently because it is solution viscosity does not build up .
So , there is no question of local heat formation , local spot formation , hot spot formation and degradation of molecules and thermal control becomes easier .
Now , what is disadvantage obviously you are doing a solutions of monomer concentration goes down which means rate of polymerization becomes lower and molecular weight becomes lower .
And unless if you do not choose the solvent very carefully the solvent can participate in chain transfer reaction , reduce your molecular weight further , so you have to be very careful .
Now of course , sometimes is very difficult to remove the solvent quantitatively from the polymer no matter how much vacuum you applied it is very difficult some times because solvents stick to the polymer .
So , it is sometimes very difficult to take out all the solvents from the polymer quantitively .
And that is very detrimental for the properties of the you know final polymers , you do not want solvent to be contaminating your polymers .
Now of course , you cannot throughout all the solvents unit solvent recovery and recyclic which is a very hazardous for this .
We are talking about organic solvent , so it is not very environmental friendly and the person scientist finally either .
You know we not want somebody working in the lab with the huge amount of organic solvent that is health hazardous well as the environmental hazardous .
These are the disadvantage for a solution polymerization , but still use for making polyethylene poly acrylonitrile or polyethylene acetate .
There is a third type of polymerization we talking about where is a heterogeneous polymerization it could be suspension or dispersion .
In case of , suspension monomer and monomer soluble water suspension polymers are nothing but bulk polymerization done in in small volumes .
You make this small volumes of bulk polymers distributed in a or dispersed in a aqueous solution .
So , all the disadvantage of the bulk polymers should not be present here because you are doing in a small small volumes and small droplets and because its present in a in a surrounded by aqueous medium .
So , heat dispersion heat dissipation is easy , viscosity is does not build up its not a problem .
What you do , you dissolve take your monomer dissolve the initiator in the monomer and then on that you add your dispersing medium which is already heated in the temperature you want to do your reaction .
So , you take the monomer along with your initiator you add the preheated dispersing medium and then reversely start .
Once , you start this monomers containing the initiator will form droplets .
And it will remain dispersed because you have added in that reaction medium and dispersions which are typically water soluble polymers like polyethylene glycol or some inorganic particles which actually get absorbed on this particles and prevent them to coulis .
So , that they remain in the as a dispersion form because you have this soluble water soluble polymers or the ionic particles which actually act as a stabilizer for this droplets .
So , what you do initially , you initiate is dissolved in the monomer and then preheated dispersing minimum added .
And vigorous starting converts the monomer containing initiator into strong small droplets of 100 to 500 microns , and because dispersant presence which are very small amount 0.1 weight percent .
And because you are continually stirring this actually stabilized the suspension , so the poly .
Now , you have the monomer droplets along with the initiator molecules has a small droplets which are dispersed in the aqueous solution .
Now , you are doing the bulk polymerization in the small droplets .
So , all the advantages of bulk polymerization is remain still intact high polymerization rate , high molecular weight , very pure monomers .
And once the polymerization is complete you can just filter out and get the final polymers in a beads form .
That is why some times it call as a bead or a pearl polymerization .
So , you can remain maintain all the advantages of the high polymer bulk polymerization and you can get the polymers by filtration as a beads .
Now , these beads should not stick which other .
It should be rigid if you want to isolate these polymers as a bead then it should be rigid and it should not stick to each other .
Now , that happens if your polymer glass transition is is way above your room temperature .
The temperature you are taking out if your glass transition temperature your polymer is close to that room temperature or little higher than the polymer will be soft .
And if the polymers are soft then they will stick to each other .
So , this methods is typically applied for the polymers which have the high glass transition temperature like methyl methacrylate and all this things .
So , we will start from this point and talk about the dispersion polymerization and emulsion polymerization in the next lecture .
Today we shall discuss the performance of enzyme catalyzed reactors , the reactors in which enzyme catalyzed reactions are supposed to take place.You will recall earlier we had discussed some of the salient features of different reactor types ranging from batch reactors , batch stirred tank reactors to continuous stirred tank reactor or plug flow reactors and fluidized bed reactors .
In fact some of the unusual reactor configurations which have been proposed to catalyze to be used for carrying out enzyme catalyzed reaction like hollow fiber reactors also arbitrarily fall into one of those categories of plug flow or CSTR which were discussed .
We had also seen earlier the factors that affect the choice of different reactor types and to recall some of the factors that we had talked about the most important ones are listed here like form of the enzyme .
That is soluble , fibrous or particulate .
The nature of the substrate whether it is soluble , particulate or colloidal , operational requirements ; the control of pH in case an acid is produced or consumed in the reaction , reaction kinetics , carrier loading capacity , catalytic surface to reactor volume ratio , mass transfer characteristics , ease of catalyst replacement and regeneration , reactor cost and ease of fabrication .
All these factors that I have listed here can be considered mainly under two categories .
One category contains the factor which becomes fixed once an immobilized enzyme is prepared .
That means the factors that are dictated by the immobilization enzyme preparation itself .
For example form of the enzyme ; the nature of the substrate is also fixed .
Once the enzymatic reaction is defined the nature of substrate is fixed .
The operational requirement is also fixed depending upon the nature of the enzyme catalyzed reaction whether an acid is produced or consumed and pH control is a requirement .
Similarly the catalytic surface to volume ratio is also fixed once an immobilized enzyme preparation is available .
The carrier loading capacity also depends on the bulk density of the immobilized enzyme preparation and things like that .
Ease of catalyst replacement and reactor cost and ease of fabrication are the factors which are dependent on the type of enzyme reactor .
But the two important class of factors which I wanted to point out here is one is reaction kinetics and mass transfer characteristics .
They are the ones which very heavily dictate the choice of the reactor ; whether to go for a plug flow reactor or to go for a batch reactor or to go for a continuous stirred tank reactor are very heavily dictated by mass transfer requirements and reaction kinetics .
I would once again point out that we have knowingly ignored heat transfer requirements assuming that for most of the enzyme catalyzed reaction the rate of reaction is very , very small and so heat transfer during the reaction is not a major critical factor .
In certain cases if it is so , the heat transfer characteristics also must be taken into account .
Last time I was taking we had also considered certain idealized reactor design parameter .
That means for design of a particular type of reactor what kind of design parameters are important and you will recall that we had also hypothesized certain conditions or assumptions which define an idealized enzyme reactor system and the assumptions were that isothermal operation , ?
H is very small , uniform enzyme distribution , plug flow behavior or completely back mix behavior , that means you have one of the extreme fluid dynamics in the reactor system .
Either it is a plug flow motion or it is a completely back mix and nothing in between .
That is what we have assumed and there are no mass transfer limitations and no significant partitioning of substrate between bulk and the carrier phase .
These are the basic assumptions which define our ideal enzyme reactor and the reactor design parameters .
That means the parameter which we should define initially before we go on to design any particular reactor was “tau ” , the space time in the reactor ; initial substrate concentration , enzyme loading , E0 .
In the case of continuous operation , the information about the deactivation rate constant is also required , kd .
Then the temperature of operation , pH control and these are the reaction conditions .
Other design parameters are fractional conversion and productivity and reactor capacity .
That is the maximum reaction capacity assuming that the enzyme reaction follows a maximum reaction velocity , that is zero order profile and the productivity of that kind of the reactor will be your reaction capacity .
Ultimately the performance will be dictated very heavily by enzyme kinetics .
If we consider …. .. enzyme reactor we can safely say that Michaelis Menten kinetics provides us a basis for carrying out a universally accepted kinetics for enzyme catalyzed reactions and so therefore we will assume in most cases v is equal to v = k2E0S / Km + S Wherever we are talking of immobilized enzyme we must also clearly understand that these two terms k2 and Km are denoted by prime indicating only that they are immobilized enzyme parameters and not the soluble parameters .
The first and probably the most simplest reactors is the batch reactors .
The batch reactor can be used both for soluble enzyme as well as for immobilized enzyme.You can carry out a batch reactor in a stirred mode or in a packed bed mode with using total recycle and on the right hand side is the characteristic profile of the reaction species that is the substrate and product with reference to time .
The substrate concentration drops and ultimately depending upon the extent of conversion which we require , the product concentration increases .
A typical profile ; it can change from reaction to reaction .
If the reaction is very strongly inhibited by products or strongly inhibited by substrates the profile might undergo a change .
One of the probably very general features of analyzing the reactor performance as you may be aware is material balance across the reactor .
You take material balance for one of the reaction species say substrate and make a material balance ; simplify it .
Do mathematical steps and you will arrive at the reactor performance equations which will give you the performance of reactor .
When I say performance of reactor I mean the extent of conversion as a function of space time or in a batch reactor with the reaction time .
In the case of a batch reactor the reactor performance can be just simplified integrated form of the reaction equation and that is - ds / dt = k2.E0 Km / S + 1 Typical Michaelis Menten equation .
Even when we write integrated form of equation we can assume that this is also valid if you make a material balance across the batch reactor because the classical material balance equation requires that input minus output minus conversion should be equal to accumulation .
Here in the case of a batch reactor the accumulation is volume multiplied by rate of change of substrate concentration that is –v.ds / dt .
Input and output here are taken as zero because there is no continuous input and output .
Only initially we feed the reactor and at the end of the reaction time the output is taken out .
There is no continuous output or input in the system and the conversion is given by the rate of reaction .
So v into rate of reaction is the total accumulation and the conversion factor and by canceling the volume term from both the sides you can arrive at the integrated form of the equation and this equation if you integrate , it will lead to the reactor performance equation .
If you just simplify it , you will get Km ln S0 / S + S0 - S = k2.E0.t Again I like to repeat that in case if we are using a batch reactor for immobilized enzymes we should replace Km and k2 by prime terms .
This is equation 1 and this is equation 2 .
If you want to describe the equations in terms of reactor performance then X is equal to S0 - S X = = 1 - S / S0 ; S / S0 = 1 - X S0 So if you substitute all these parameters you get in terms of reactor performance equation for a batch reactor in the form of fractional conversion that is XS0 + K ’ mln 1 / 1 - X = k ’ 2E0t The reaction performance equation for a batch reactor if we want in the terms of product concentration , product concentration is nothing else but P = S0 - S assuming that its a unimolecular reaction .
If in case you are handling with a different kind of a reaction scheme let us say one mole of substrates goes into two moles of products then accordingly one has to make a change in the definition of X as well as P .
This will be equal to P = S0 - S = XS0 Therefore you can also write in terms of product concentration KmlnS0 / S0 + P = k ’ 2E0t If you look at these equations you can use the reactor performance data of a batch reactor .
That means you take a single batch performance data ; take the maximum conversion at different times of reaction .
You can write down the expression ln S0 / S 1 k ’ 2E0t + = S0 - S Km K ’ m ( S0 - S ) From the equation two if you just simplify you get a straight line equation which can give the values of Km and vm .
If you plot let us say ln ( S0 - S ) / S0 - S and t / S0 - S , you get the slope of k ’ 2E0 / K ’ m and with the intercept as - 1 / K ’ m Sorry .
X - axis is lnS0 / S .
This provides you one of the simple methods .
When we immobilize enzymes if we monitor the kinetics parameters Km and vm , the simple way to measure the kinetic constants for an immobilized enzyme reaction will be to carry out the reaction in a batch stirred reactor .
Monitor the substrate concentration or fraction of conversion with reference to time and determine the parameters by a single reactor performance data .
That provides us a simple tool , batch reactor for small scale laboratory experiments to determine the kinetic parameters both for soluble enzyme as well as for immobilized enzyme .
Here I must again put a caution .
When we used the Michaelis Menten equation you will recall that we had made certain assumptions and the assumptions were that we are talking of the initial reaction rate .
That means at a time equal to zero .
Whereas when we integrate the equation from zero to time t let us say to a conversion factor of 90 % or 95 % or 99 % , the reaction rate is not likely to remain the same as that of the initial time .
So here we are violating some of the basic assumptions of the Michaelis Menten equation .
But still it gives you a very approximate situation for designing a reactor or making some design calculations to work out reactor size or the capacity of the reactor , accepting that and even compare between soluble enzyme and immobilized enzyme but otherwise under idealistic conditions , the assumptions in the Michaelis Menten equation that of the initial reaction rate , absence of product division is not met here .
So when we apply the integrated Michaelis Menten equation for looking at the performance of an immobilized enzyme reactor in the batch mode we must keep in mind that it only gives you an approximate situation just to tell the sizing of the vessels required for a particular enzyme catalyzed reaction and to compare the soluble enzyme with that of immobilized enzyme performance .
Even while looking at the kinetics of the soluble enzyme we always look at the situations when it comes to extreme substrate conditions .
That means either when the substrate concentration is much , much smaller than Km or when it is much higher than Km .
That means it ranges from first order to zero order regime .
How the reactor performance will change ?
For example when substrate concentration is much , much smaller than K ’ m , reactor performance becomes - K ’ m ln ( 1 - X ) = k ’ 2E0t When S0 is much , much greater than K ’ m that is zero order regime .
XS0 = k ’ 2E0t If suppose you approximate an enzyme reactor to follow either a zero order or a first order regime , knowing the values of Km and k2 the error involved in that will be determined by the ratio of Km / S0 .
If the ratio of Km / S0 is very , very small you will hardly incur any error if you assume it to be a first order .
When we go on to consider along with the reaction kinetics we consider mass transfer and all more complications we will tend to approximate our reactor performance in either zero order or first order regime rather than making it a Michaelis Menten equation which might make the solution of the expressions more difficult or it can be done by any numerical methods .
But analytical solutions may be difficult .
We make an assumption depending upon the range in which our substrate concentration exists in relation to Km value .
The error involved will increase if you increase the ratio of Km to S0 and you assume a first order because then both will go towards the zero order kinetics .
If the Km to S0 ratio increases and you assume a first order kinetics error will keep on increasing .
Km is much , much larger than the S0 in the first order .
So the value of Km / S0 will be larger .
Km / S0 will be large and under that condition you must assume a first order kinetics and if the value of Km / S0 decreases the error will continue to increase .
In fact one can make a hypothetical computation and then we take up an assignment to design an enzyme reactor or for that matter any process equipment .
A 10 % error in calculation is usually taken for granted .
If you are going to measure let us say the value of Km or vm , you need an accurate value .
But when you want to go for design , let us say a reaction capacity ; what is the volume of the reactor required to carry out this conversion ?
You are not going to be very specific that this is the volume required .
You will add on to that about 10 % open added space or for various purposes .
So if let us say the error involved is less than 10 % , I think there is no harm in making an assumption of zero order or first order .
If the error involved is much larger then our assumptions will be slightly hazardous .
The next simple form of reactor system which is commonly employed is a continuous stirred tank reactor .
In the continuous stirred tank reactor one is a continuous flow reactor .
That means the feed rate of the substrate is same as the output rate of the product stream .
So if the feed is added at the flow rate of “F ” let us say litres or moles per unit time , what ever unit you follow , the volume remains the constant .
Substrate concentration S0 , changes at the exit .
But one of the characteristic features is that all the parameters at the exit stream are same as in the reactor itself .
That means the reaction will take place under conditions of S , P or X which exist at the exit stream .
Therefore if you just write a material balance for such a reactor system you can write accumulation as V.ds / dt = FS0 –FS – v.V FS0 is the input ; S is the substrate concentration in the outlet and v is the reaction velocity that is the conversion due to the reaction and V is the reactor volume .
Consider that after a certain period of time the reactor comes under steady state situation .
When we say steady state situation it means that the concentration of any species does not change with time in the outlet stream .
Under that condition the accumulation term will tend to be zero because whatever material is coming in , either it is getting converted to do reaction or it is going out of the reactor .
There is no accumulation of any species in the system and therefore one can write k ’ 2E0S v = D ( S0 - S ) = K ’ m + S D is the term here what we understand as dilution rate or F / V or in other words V / F is the resistance time , inverse of space time .
So this D is the term and you can also write k ’ 2E0S S0 - S = K ’ m + S ?
That is your space time that was defined in the earlier expressions .
Solving these equations you can also get k ’ 2E0 ?
= S0X + K ’ m ( X / 1 - X ) That gives you a reactor performance for a CSTR and from the substrate concentration if you make a substitution for X , you arrive at detector performance for CSTR .
Similarly here also if you make assumptions of zero order or first order situation when K ’ m is much , much smaller than S0 , that is a zero order system ?
= XS0 / k ’ 2S0 For first order system where K ’ m is much , much greater than S0 , you have K ’ m ( X / 1 - X ) = k ’ 2E0 ?
. Second expression is ?
= XS0 / k ’ 2E0 .
So you get the two expressions for CSTR the general reactor performance expression and also under conditions of zero order and first order scenario .
The expressions are very simple and if you have the data available for any reactor performance for S0 , fraction of conversion required , you can determine the volume of the reactor required or the feed rate required depending on the tau and one can make computation to define the reactor performance under given conditions .
The other idealized reactor or which is what we understand as the plug flow is slightly typical in the sense that unlike in the case of a CSTR , the concentration of the substrate or the product vary along the length of the reactor .
So making a material balance across the reactor you cannot choose any concentration term because the concentration term for substrate changes with the length of the reactor and the concentration of the substrate or product is not constant throughout the reactor .
It varies ; that means if you consider along the length of the reactor , kind of a batch reactor with different reaction times but to arrive at the reactor performance what we can do is we can make a material balance across a differential element of the plug flow reactor and if we consider differential element of volume d v you can make your material balance say under same conditions like the feed flow rate as “F ” , the conversion changes from X to X + ?
X at the inlet X is equal to zero at the outlet X has some value .
If you consider here input to the system is F.S and this input I am writing at the entry of the differential element and output , not at the entry of the reactor , is equal to F ( S + dS ) and the disappearance of the substrate by the reaction will be the continuation of the reaction to the disappearance of the substrate is –v. ( dV ) Under these conditions one can write the material balance under steady state assuming that the accumulation is zero .
F.S = F ( S + dS ) + ( - v ) .dV One can simplify it to get F.dS = v.dV Here for the fraction of conversion X = S0 - S / S0 ; dS = - S0dX F.S0.dX = - v.dV You can integrate this and the integrated form will give you the zero to v dv / FS0 which will be equal to zero to X dX / - v or V / FS0 because feed rate is constant , substrate concentration is constant and so the definite integral will come to V / FS0 and that is ?
/ S0 which is equal to zero to X dX / - v .
If you look at the performance of a plug flow reactor you ultimately arrive at or transfer the S0 to here so tau is equal to S0.dX / - v .
That is the reaction rate .
So the performance will be almost identical to that of a batch reactor excepting with the difference that the reaction time here is replaced by the space time and the reactor performance therefore on the same lines you can write as S0X – K ’ m ln ( 1 - X ) = k ’ 2E0 e ?
Epsilon , while in the case of a stirred bed reactor , is taken to be one .
That means the volume of the reactor occupied by the enzyme preparation is negligible compared to the total reactor volume whereas in the case of a packed bed a significant proportion of the reactor is occupied by the enzyme preparation .
I was just trying to define the term what I introduced here as epsilon .
In the case of a batch stirred reactor we have not considered epsilon because the quantity of enzyme or the volume of enzyme in the reactor is negligible compared to the total volume of the reactor .
A very small fraction of the total volume is occupied by the enzyme preparation .
On the other hand in the case of a packed bed reactor a significant fraction of the volume of the reactor is occupied by the packed bed and the volume occupied by the fluid or the feed substrate is only the wide volume of the reactor and therefore the volume occupied by the feed in the reactor is considered as the actual reactor volume .
This tau term has been defined earlier as V / F ; in the case of a packed bed reactor we define tau as eV / F .
That is for CSTR or for a stirred batch reactor the magnitude of epsilon is one .
So this gives you the reactor performance for a plug flow reactor following Michaelis Menten kinetics .
The same analysis as we did earlier if you consider for zero order kinetics the tau is equal to ?
= XS0 / k ’ 2E0e For first order , tau is equal to ?
= - K ’ m ln ( 1 - X ) / k ’ 2E0e A very important feature which I like to recall is the relative performance equations for zero order regime for both CSTR as well as for PFR , which are identical .
If you look at the equation number two here for the CSTR and the equation for the zero order regime here in the case of the PFR , they are identical .
That means the fluid dynamics in the reactor whether it is a back mix system or its a plug flow system does not influence the reactor performance as long as the reaction is in the zero order regime or the concentration of the substrate is much , much higher than the Km value and you must appreciate that if it is in our limits we will always like to use a very high substrate concentration .
If the system doesn ’ t undergo substrate inhibition that is if it undergoes inhibition , we have no choice other than to using a lower substrate concentration .
There are two things one will always like to have a high substrate concentration for a reaction ; for commercial purposes also we like to have a very high fraction of conversion and one would like to carry out the reaction almost to conversion levels of ninety five percent plus so as to achieve a complete conversion of substrate as much as possible so that the recovery and the purification stages are simplified or the product stream can be used as it is for end applications .
So the only difference lies in the case of reactor performance of plug flow reactor .
Consider a first order regime where K ’ m is much , much greater than S0 .
In the case of CSTR , you have the reactor performance as K ’ m ( X / 1 - X ) = k ’ 2E0 ?
In the case of PFR , the expression changes to K ’ m ln ( 1 - X ) = k ’ 2E0 e ?
Our interest will always be to have a high fractional conversion .
That means most of the substrates which is being fed gets converted into product .
If we want to compare the performance of both CSTR and PFR as I mentioned in the case of zero order regime there is no change and the performance remains identical .
That means the quantity of the enzyme required will be identical in both cases for carrying out the same conversion and at the same enzyme loading .
But if you consider the first order regime the performance are quite different and if you compare the relative performance , relative quantity of the enzyme required that is ECSTR , the quantity of enzyme required in CSTR and PFR relative quantities or we can define this term as Erel will be equal to ECSTR / EPFR = Erel = - X e / ( 1 - X ) ln ( 1 - X ) The relative quantity of enzyme required in the case of CSTR and PFR under first order regime can be given by this expression .
You notice in this expression that higher the required conversion level , higher the relative amount of the enzyme required in the CSTR .
You can just hypothetically put some values of let us say a safe value for epsilon for a typical packed bed reactor varies from between 0.4 to0.5 .
You take a simple value of 0.5 and if you make calculation for X = 0.90 , the Erel required will be equal to 4.5 .
That means the enzyme required for the same fractional conversion that is 90 % in the case of a CSTR will be 4.5 times more than that required in the PFR for the same conversion .
The same enzyme , the same reaction , the same conversion factor but the quantity of enzyme required in CSTR will be much , much higher compared to PFR .
If you change the fractional conversion to , let us say , 0.99 , the Erel value shoots up to 25 .
The inference I want to arrive at is that higher the fractional conversion required for a particular reaction under first order regime , the relative quantity of the enzyme required in the CSTR will drastically increase .
That means even for certain reasons if you want to use CSTR pH control is a requirement and we are obliged to use CSTR , then it is always advisable only to use if the fraction of conversion required is not very high .
In case if the fraction of conversion required is very high if you are looking for a 99 % conversion , it will be desirable to use a plug flow reactor with a partial recycle .
You can have facility for pH control with some inconvenience ; may be some more additional equipments has to be added but still that will be better because the quantity of the enzyme required will be much less and that gives us a significant advantage for using immobilized enzyme in PFR and that is one of the reasons why you will notice in the literature that almost about 70 - 80 % of the total reports which appear on the use of the immobilized enzymes are in a plug flow reactors and the advantage lies in the quantity of the enzyme required and this advantage will keep on reducing .
That is the relative quantity will keep on reducing if the shift is from first order to zero order ultimately it will reach to same quantity .
If we take the value of Km / S0 from a very high value to a very low value , the relative quantity of the enzyme will also keep on reducing and it will become equal to the relative enzyme value , Erel and will become one .
Then the value of S0 is much , much higher than Km .
A typical profile for relative quantity required is shown here .
As you notice here what ever I mentioned , it signifies the same thing .
There are two things to be looked at .
One is the relative quantity of substrate to Km .
Here instead of Km / S0 I plotted S0 / Km .
The top profile , the first profile indicates a very low value of S0 / Km which means a first order regime .
That means as the fractional conversion increases , the relative quantity required also increases and towards the final stages of the fractional conversion , the quantity very significantly goes up .
The increase in the quantity of the enzyme required is not very large in the low fractional conversion levels whereas as soon as you cross 0.90 % conversion , the quantity required becomes significantly high .
On the other hand you also see when you come to S0 / Km as hundred approaching towards zero order regime the quantities remain almost equal all through , till you arrive at 90 plus or more than 95 % fractional conversion .
One can have such a profile and when one wants to analyze the reactor performance for any given immobilized enzyme system , one must really characterize a system with reference to such kind of profiles so that one can get a feel of the substrate concentration required and the fractional conversion required , one can choose where to bank upon .
For example in the earlier phases let us say up to 90 % , there is no major gain in using PFR .
But if you want to use a fraction of conversion much higher than 90 % then the PFR becomes more and more matter of choice .
Then the immobilization will be identical .
Your choice should depend upon the operational convenience .
For example if the pH control is required CSTR is preferable and then the nature of the substrate , the nature of the enzyme and the form of the enzyme .
If suppose your substrate is colloidal , we will prefer to use CSTR rather than the PFR ; it will choke .
The pressure drop will continuously keep on increasing .
If suppose the enzyme particles are in the form of fibers or spherical beads , it is easier to pack them rather than putting in the CSTR where there might be abrasion .
So the form of substrate and form of enzyme will dictate the choice .
The kinetics will not be dictating .
So far we have not considered the inhibition patterns .
We have not considered the behaviour of the reactor performance if the enzyme undergoes inhibition kinetics .
That means either a substrate inhibition or a product inhibition or a third inhibitor an external inhibitor available in that .
We have also not considered the deactivation of the enzyme on the reactor performance .
All these parameters particularly the inhibitors , rather their inhibition pattern , their deactivation pattern , the mass transfer requirements , the mass transfer limitations and the non - ideal flow behavior ; these are the four things .
So far we have been talking assuming that the enzyme reactors are ideal in performance and they are following Michaelis Menten type of kinetics .
At best the extremes of those cases under zero and first order but we have not considered the inhibition pattern , we have not considered the deactivation kinetics , mass transfer limitations and non - ideal flow behavior .
That is we are considering only either a PFR or CSTR which is an ideal flow dynamics in the reactor .
In many cases practical reactors may not be an ideal CSTR or ideal PFR .
They might be some kind of deviation from the ideality because of the packing characteristics or some channeling taking place or in laboratory you can very easily maintain a good plug flow reactor .
But in a large system it is always difficult to maintain and it is always desirable to identify or characterize your reactor with reference to flow behavior and then make a correction factor when the design part comes into .
So all these issues we will take individually rather than compounding all of them because not that all the issues will be applied in a particular reactor system we will have to identify the issues which are important .
For example we identify let us say the mass transfer limitations are the most acute .
The system is mass transfer limited .
There is point to consider reaction kinetics ; you design your reactor system based on mass transfer diffusional requirements .
Similarly if you consider that the flow behavior is drastically non - ideal there is a full channeling ; then corrections are to be applied to the design expression to get the reactor performance .
I think we will stop here and continue to discuss the behavior of enzyme reactors .
Welcome to this course on Polymer Chemistry , I am Dibakar Dhara .
I belong to the Department of Chemistry of IIT , Kharagpur .
In this course I planned to cover the following topics .
At the start I will be giving you a thorough introduction about the polymers which includes the classification , nomenclature and perspective of molecular of polymer molecules .
Then I plan to cover in details various polymerization processes .
I talk about , I will talk about the kinetics and the mechanism of different polymer processes which includes step growth and chain growth polymerization .
I also will cover copolymerization specially the kinetics of free radical copolymerization , and then I will also cover other important polymerization techniques such as ring opening polymerization , and coordination polymers .
In the characterization , I will talk on detail about the thermodynamics of polymer solutions and then polymer chain dimensions , and I also will cover in detail about various methods for measuring molecular weight of polymer , polymers .
And then I will cover polymer , important polymer properties and how the structure of polymer molecules correlates to these properties .
I will also cover both the chemical structure as well as physical structure of the polymers and how it relates to the polymer properties .
I will cover in brief the reaction of polymers which include polymer degradation , stabilization and also polymer modifications and at the end I have planned to brief you about few new topics , and special topics and new development in polymer chemistry and at the end I will complete with a summary of this course .
Now , after learning what are the topics , we planned to cover in this course , let us introduce polymer to you , what are polymers ?
We we listen everywhere about the polymers , but what are polymers ?
In a very simple term , in a single sentence polymers can be defined that they are large molecules that is why sometimes they call macromolecules synonymously .
They consist of many repeating structural units , the term polymers derived from Greek words poly and meros , poly means many and meros means part .
If I want to just show you pictorially or schematically this is the representation of polymers , you have this structure units monomers and on polymerization its gives you a linkage between the polymers making a large molecules .
So , you get a polymer for example you have ethylene here and in this side after polymerization you have polyethylene .
In this case all the monomers are same so we name these polymers ; we term these polymers as homo polymers .
Polymers can be made from more than one monomers as well , different monomers which is showed in pictorial in two colors and in that case you get a polymers consist of two different structural units , you and we call them as copolymers .
To just give you a example of copolymers I have a say I have a molecule like styrene and I also have a molecule like methyl methacrylate .
Now , this two can be polymerized to give you a poly styrene co MMA , this is a copolymer of poly styrene and methyl methacrylate .
Now , this term copolymers are used generally when you have a polymers which are synthesized from two different monomers where the monomers can be polymerized independently , which means in this case styrene as well as the MMA can be polymerized to , individually can aim to polystyrene and poly methyl methacrylate .
There is other type of polymers which are also synthesized from two different monomers .
For example , if I take a example of terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol , I have n molecules of this , n molecules of this which on polymerization gives you a polymers which is known as polyethylene terephthalate .
We get this pet bottles they are this , they are made of this polyethylene terephthalate .
So , in this case this polymer pet is also made from two different monomers terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol and we make a polymer , but generally generally we do not call this polymer as a copolymer whenever , because as I said earlier this monomer terephthalic acid or this ethylene glycol cannot be polymerized independently by all or individually , this terephthalic acid cannot be made polymers by itself or a ethylene glycol cannot be made polymer by this process .
If if we have say more than one diol in this case ethylene glycol and say butylene glycol , that case we will have a mixture of two structure unit where you have terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol and also a terephthalic acid and butylene glycol in this , that case we call this or we name this polymers as a copolymers .
To just repeat about this copolymers generally , we use the term copolymers where the polymer is synthesized form to different monomers where the monomers are or can be polymer individually .
There is another case where polymer is made from two different monomers , but in this case we do not call this as a copolymers , because the constituents monomer usually cannot be homo polymerized independently by the same process .
And when you make polymerization polymers , we invariably land up in distribution of molecular weight while a polymer is a high molecular weight , but it also gives you a distribution of molecular weight that means it has several length , the polymer mixture is consist of different molecular weight chains and this is , this high molecular weight of polymer which gives you or which enables a polymer to have this useful properties where , for which the polymer is known for for example , it gives you high tensile strength impact resistant , toughness , melt viscosity and and so on .
Now , you might ask me why and what is the reason this high molecular weight help in giving the , a polymer this superior properties compared to this small molecules .
Let us look at this cartoon , if you compare as collection of small molecules or short molecules like a sugar and a long molecules which is a polymer sample .
This is individual colors ; individual chains represent a individual molecules in this case as well .
Now , this is a case where the individual molecules are small in size , they are not entangled with each other .
So , given a stress from outside they can be separated easily , in other word these small molecules behave independently .
If I just give you a example of real life , say I have taken a bowl of rice and you want to take out rice with a spoon , you can easily take out because each individual rice units behave independently .
So , you can easily take out rice from a bowl by a spoon .
Whereas in case of polymers because of the large size and its flexibility they are present in a mixture in a entangled well .
That means the polymer chains are entangled to each other and as they are entangled they cannot be moved independently with each other for example , real life example if I have a bowl of noodles and I ask you to take a spoon , no , one spoon of noodles , you cannot independently take out as a noodles to the spoon because they are entangled .
So , chains come together so when you take out a noodles you get a junk of polymer or no no pieces of noodles which you take out .
So , in this case where it was very easy to deform or set up small , mixture of small molecules in this case because of the large molecules it is difficult to deform a polymer molecules which gives you high viscosity , which gives you the high strength of the polymer molecules , high impact resistant , toughness and all other good properties of molecular polymer samples and that is why polymers is so popular now a days .
Okay , coming to the more definitions relevant to our course of polymer chemistry as such .
Monomers , we talked about several times monomers .
Monomers are molecules from which polymers are made .
They must have at least or functionality of two to that means they can be , no , reacted at least from two sides for example , we talked about styrene molecules or ethylene molecules which means they can be extended from two sides .
If you have a molecules which have only one functionality for example , instead of ethylene glycol you have a phenol molecules , then once this weights of phenol is reacted you , the chain does not goes , you you cannot make a polymers .
So , for making a polymers you require monomers which have at least two functionality in them .
Repeating units it is a structure , a a polymer is formed from repeating units which means that when you write a polymer structures , the repeating unit is the unit which gets repeated .
For examples I talked about the ethylene molecule in or say simple example of say polystyrene molecule .
This is styrene and when it polymerized its gives you polystyrene .
In this case this is the unit which is repeated which means and this is called , this is the repeat unit for polystyrene case .
Now , if I go back the example I gave in the few minutes back , in this case for example , for polyethylene terephthalate this is the unit which is represented in the bracket .
It is subscript of n , this is the units which gets repeated .
So , if I want to write a structure of PET then I can take these units and put one after one to build the polymer units or the polymer molecules .
So , just to clarify one more time , in case of styrene we have the styrene unit as as a repeat unit and in case of PET you have this unit away with a repeating unit .
We talk about oligomers .
Oligomers are you know during the process of polymer synthesis , you get the small chain units which are consist of 2 monomers , 3 monomers , 4 monomers and so on , dimer , trimer , tetramers and these are called or termed as oligomers .
Now , you can ask me till when , till what time we call a molecule as a polymer or oligomer ?
Whether it is after 10 , 11 , 12 , 20 , 50 , 100 you know after how many repeat units , you call a polymer as a polymer and before that you call as a oligomer .
Now , it depends it depends upon different polymers , the easiest way to think a molecule , a long molecule as a polymer not a oligomer if you add another unit repeating unit or you take out another unit and by doing this addition of one unit or taking out all unit , if the property of the polymer or the molecule does not change you call it as a polymer , but if change significantly then you still call it as a oligomer and that will depend on the chemical structure of the polymer .
So , some cases if you increase from a repeat unit number from 20 to 21 or decrease from 20 to 19 you might see there is a change in the property , you cannot call that chain as a polymer you have to call that as a oligomer , whereas in some cases some some cases you do not see any changes say after 20 to make 20 to 21 and 20 to 19 then you call that as a polymer .
Define degree of polymers , its , it is the number of structural units present in a polymer molecule .
What is structure units ?
Let us talk about the example I just showed you before .
In the case of polystyrene this is repeating unit and this is also a structure unit because structural units is the unit which is derived from a monomer .
So , in this case this unit is coming from a single monomer of styrene which where double bound is replaced by a single molecules .
So , in this case number of repeating units RU repeating units is same as number of structural units SU is structural units .
Whereas , in this case , case of polyethylene terephthalate individual monomers which are coming here and making the polymer they are called structural units .
So , in this case if n is number of repeat units then it each unit consist of two structure units because in this repeat units is derived from two monomers , one terephthalic acid unit , one ethylene glycol units .
So , whereas in earlier case the number of repeating units were same as number of structural units .
In this case number of repeat units is actually half of the number of structural units .
So , when you define degree of polymerization it is the number of structural units not the number of repeat units present in a polymer .
So , in this case if the molecular weight of of each styrene , molecular styrene is m and you have a polymer with n number of repeat units same as structural units then molecular weight of this polymer would be m multiplied by n .
Now , what happened in this case ?
In the case of PET .
For example , if I take the molecular weight of this as m 1 and this as m 2 then how do you get the polymer molecular weight ?
How do you define ?
How did you define the degree of polymerization is the number of structure unit .
So , in this case the polymer molecular weight will be degree of polymerization multiplied by the average of these two monomers minus the water molecules which have been eliminated , I will show you a example , real example in coming pages .
So , that it will get clear little bit more , if it is not clear already .
So , let us see whether it get clarified to you in this cartoon .
You know in this case of styrene you have polystyrene in this case .
So , structural units is same as repeat units and in this case whether you have a say example of poly terephthalic acid PET terephthalate PET to it is the polymer is derived from two different units then the repeat units is this whereas , this consists of two structural units .
So , if I take this this part then it this consist of four structural units , but only two repeat units and as I said degree of polymers is number of structural units , and the molecular weight of polymer molecules is degree of polymerization that means number of structural units multiplied by the average structure unit .
Now , before going forward let us clarify one thing in a more often or not you know in commonly polymers are referred as plastics .
People ask for banning plastics , plastic bag , plastic shoes , plastics bottle everything you know , most of the applications of polymers are referred to as a application of plastics .
Now , there is certain difference between the term plastics and polymer .
Polymers are the molecules which we synthesize from the monomer , they are individual molecules or a mixture of molecules , but we do not use when you synthesize a polymer from , in the lab or in a plant we do not use , in a seldom use as the polymers as synthesized .
In most cases what happened we add some additives like pigment , stabilizers and then process that polymer mixture , you know polymer with the mixture to turn this polymer into a practical product .
So , if I talk about pet bottle when you synthesize pet in the lab and that is not a plastic material or when you take a pet molecule poly terephthalate molecule in the plant and then mix with the stabilizer and other things and form that bottle , that is called plastics .
Plastics has also more , have more scientific definitions which we come later , but at at this point you must remember that plastics are made of polymers , but not all polymers are plastics like there are several other applications where polymers are not used as plastics .
So , when you talk about you know , but in commonly , in common man whatever they see is applications of polymers , they see in daily life is a plastic , you know applications are visible as a plastics application .
So , that is this common term that is why this common term is appearing .
Just one more time plastics are polymers , but not all polymers are plastics .
Now , this knowing , what are polymers , what are plastics and what brings the good properties in polymers ?
Now , why why you are , you will ask me why you are , why you need to study polymers , why we should be interested in studying polymer or polymer chemistry .
If you think yourself or if you read magazines and talk to the older people then you will find that in last century whatever new material development has happened polymers will rank as one of the top .
So , in last century polymer is one of the biggest success in terms of new material development and as a results more and more applications are existing or coming up where this polymers are replacing the conventional materials like metals , glass , wood and so on for example , I am wearing a spec .
Now , earlier , few years back for a decade back or so this spec was used to be made from glass , but now a days you will hardly find any spec is made up of glass , they are all made up of either polycarbonates or the cheaper ones are formed acrylics .
There are hundreds of such examples I can give , maybe I will give in later classes , but I hope you are convinced that polymers is finding applications in several places and now a days when we talk about you know we , a scientist or the developer you know application specialist with thing for a new material application .
First thing comes into mind is a polymer and more often not a polymer becomes very often the material of choice for new applications .
So , I have , hope you are convinced that polymers are you know a useful material and replacing the conventional materials .
If you are still not convinced , if you think what you do once you wake up from bed you take a brush which is made up of plastic material , you use the toothpaste which contain polymer molecules , you take food , foods are also having natural polymers , the container sometimes we use , disposable plastics and you wear shirts , clothes which are made of polyesters , cottons these are all examples of polymers .
Then you come to office by a car or a bus or a cycle .
There are hundreds of polymer goes in those applications .
You name , you know wear shoes , everything .
Now , you can argue me that these are very common common materials and these are no need for main development work for this .
So , you do not need to study polymer because the knowledge or technical knowledge for this common applications are well established , but if you think about examples of polymer like a artificial valve which is made of polyethylene .
Talk about a oxygenator which is used during a heart , open heart surgery or talk about applications in car head lamp , aircraft windows and and several high end applications like very high capacity DVDs .
Now , these are also application of polymers which it does not come to your mind immediately , but like this there are hundreds of very high end applications of polymers .
For examples polymers are used in medicine , as a drug delivery vehicle , as a conservation with drugs , molecules and so many .
So , in this case you require a definitive knowledge about polymers which will enable you to develop or innovate new polymer molecules or new polymer applications .
Now , why why people use polymer compared to this conventional materials or traditional materials ?
There are definitive , there are some definitive advantages for example , I just gave you example of the spec .
Now , when you use a plastic material like polycarbonate compared to a glass this becomes much lighter , you know its gives you lot of comfort than the glass .
Now , because of the lighter of weights polymers used heavily in transportations like car automotive , in trains and all these things because the light you travel that will consume less fuel .
This is one of the most important advantages of using polymers which gives you excellent strength to weight ratio .
It gives you design flexibility , you know there are and also various you know the option of giving you modern styling you know .
You buy a cheap processing you can make , take the polymers which is comes in after from the lab or in a plant and you can do the polymer processing , do a process and make or give that polymer a very nice shapes of your choice and give good style which is not possible with the traditional materials like glass and metals .
Polymers are most cases thermal insulator which makes it or enables polymers to use in electronic industry and unlike the conventional materials like wood , metal they are optically clear which enables application of polymers in media , and optical devices and one more important that there are so many polymers available in market that you can choose a definite polymer for your particular applications .
So , that you have , you do not have to limit it with number of polymers available , there are so many polymers available now in market .
So , it gives you the option of choosing a definite polymer or particular polymers for your choice of applications and of course , you know not more often and not it comes with a lower cost .
Some polymers are of course , very costly , that gives you very good performance , but more often not the polymers gives you , comes with a lower cost .
Now , before I come to the introduction of polymers or polymer chemistry , I just want to give you a big picture , a view on the top , a bird ’ s eye view from how you look at polymers .
You know different stages , life stages of polymers and how it get transformed where they induce of polymers .
So , you have a polymer molecule which you synthesized in the lab .
Now , when you synthesized you get it in solution or in a bulk .
So , you have a polymer which is prepared in the plant which is coming either in solution or in a bulk .
Sometimes , it come other form as well like in emulsions .
So , if it is solution you have to take out the polymers from the solution in a powder form and if it is in a bulk or in a melt form you can use as such and if it is in emulsion cases like some cases it is in emulsion .
So , you can use the emulsion as such .
Now , where how do you get these polymers ?
There are some polymers or few polymers which comes from natural sources like polysaccharide cellulose and more often not these natural polymers , the polymers which comes from natural source are very useful .
So , in most cases to find a polymer , these polymers are synthesized in a plant from raw materials which are monomers by the process , which are termed as polymerization .
So , you have polymers which you can get from natural source , but in majority of places a polymer is synthesized from raw materials , monomer by process called polymerization .
How , where from do you get this monomers or the raw material ?
Most cases you get from petroleum resources , ultimately from a crude oil or in some cases you also get a monomers from renewable resources or bio resources .
As I said most cases synthetic polymers are prepared or synthesized from monomers which are derived from petroleum resources .
So , now we have know where from a polymer is made .
Now , you have to take the polymers towards application side .
There are minority of polymers are taken to the applications where polymers are used along with the other ingredients like in detergents .
In a detergent formulation you have surfactant polymers and other ingredients .
If you talk about say eye drop you have polymer in aqueous solutions with salt and other ingredients .
So , in this case this are the applications which are which are where the minor , there is a minor fraction of polymers going , where polymers are used in a mixture in a solution or some other form whether polymers is either a you know active ingredient or is just act as a support role like enhancing the viscosity enhancer and so on .
But in majority you know the major volume of polymer comes out in from the manufacturing plants , goes in the application where polymer is the major part you know , is a application of polymers is major .
You can have the other ingredients along with the polymer like a stabilizer fillers or pigments , but it is the polymers which is the major ingredient and other additives acts as a support which either enable the polymer to have you know better performance .
So , in that case what is done the polymers as comes out from plant is taken to a step , taken through a step , a polymer processing step which are commonly called compound where the polymer either in a melt form or in powder form is mixed with the required additives or property enhanced enhancing fillers or sometimes with other polymers as well to make polymer blends and you get a intermediate product , is like pellets .
We call this as resins ; you might have seen this granules or pellets yourself in sometimes in the market and if the final applications is does not require very complicated geometry then in this process itself you can make the final product for example , like sheets film where in this processing step itself , the polymers are taken and the additives or fillers are added and it is given a shape of the final products like sheets and film etcetera , but this is not the major application this is the minor applications .
In most cases the polymer manufacturer makes this as a intermediate products and they sell this to its customer who makes the final product .
And once the polymer and this pellets are supplied to the equipment manufacturer , they do a processing steps to give you or to give the final shape , design fabrication step or in a finishing shape and you get the final products which gives you the , which goes into the final applications .
I will give examples which will clarify these points more in , once the final application is done the , this life cycle of the polymers does not end .
Once the application of over polymers become a waste and its very important is as important as the earlier steps that we have a very good waste management system by which we can either , we use or recycle the polymers and if you cannot recycle or reuse the polymers then this waste of the polymer , the polymer waste has to be handled very carefully .
So , that it does not pollute the environment .
So , if I repeat this life stages and various transformation step you have a monomer which most often we get from petroleum products and from monomers by doing a step called polymerization we get the polymers in the plant or in a lab either in solution or in bulk or in some cases in emulsion form .
If it is a solution you have to take out the polymers as a powder form .
So , you have now the polymers .
In minority of application this polymers are taken and added to other ingredients like the examples I gave in detergents , but in major cases the polymer is mixed with the other ingredients like additives , pigments , stabilizers and it is by a process called polymer processing , compounding and you , it is transformed with granules or flakes or pellets to form intermediate product .
These intermediate products are taken by the equipment manufacturer and by doing another processing step for example , injection molding they give the proper shape of the final applications where this polymer goes in .
How this , how the polymer industry works ?
Now , if we talk about the big polymer manufacturers like DuPont , Dow Chemicals , SABIC , Bayer they are manufacturer of polymers .
They get the monomers from other source or they might make themselves as well and they , after making the polymers in the plant they also do this steps themselves , from this intermediate product .
And then sell it to some original equipment manufacturer which do this processing step , molding step to make the final product , which goes into the final applications .
Now , let us come to a specific example .
For example if I take a car head lamp cover , the cover of the car head lamp is nowadays made from polycarbonate material .
Polycarbonate is synthesized from two monomers this phenol A and phosgene to give you polycarbonate .
Now , how do you get , how this this is produced ?
This BPA molecule , this is produced from phenol and acetone and this is produced from coke getting oxidized to carbon monoxide which one react to it chlorine gives you phosgene .
Where from this phenol comes from ?
It comes from cumin plus acetone .
Where from this cumin comes from ?
This comes from petroleum products , which is eventually coming from crude oil .
You take this polycarbonate as synthesized in a plant or in lab , add these additives , pigments etcetera and we are compounding strips and you get PC pellets .
You you sell this PC plates to a cumin manufacturer which will make say injection molding and make the head lamp cover at OEM which will be sold to the car manufacture .
Let us just go back to earlier page and repeat this .
Now , a company which makes polycarbonate , which sells polycarbonate like say Bayer or SABIC .
They make this process definitely , they make or they synthesize the polymer in the , polycarbonate in the plant them self .
They can source the monomer at any stage , they can buy BPA and phosgene , they can buy phenol and make BPA them self or they can buy a cumin and they make and they can phenol from which they can make BPA and and then PC .
They also do this step , this step compounding step them self .
Now , after making these pellet they sell it to original equipment manufacturer .
This original equipment manufacturer buy this pellets , polycarbonate pellets from any of these big companies and they mold it to , they mold it to give a form of a head lamp cover which they then supply and sell it to a car manufacturer who assemble these head lamp along with other things and have this product in the market .
So , this gives you idea about a different stages of polymers and how the industry work .
There are some smaller industries which make custom polymer products .
These are the examples of big polymer industry where the the companies make the polymers in very large quantity , where the the applications where polymers find you know minor like examples I said where polymers are synthesized and added as a active or secondary ingredient in other formulations , those polymers are typically made by the smaller companies and they are taken , they are synthesized by the smaller companies .
Now , what is the present focus of in a polymer research ?
If I go back to the earlier slide as I said that most of the current synthetic polymers are made up from monomers which are ultimately sourced from petroleum products as there is a increasing interested interest to make polymer from the monomers which are not source from petroleum products , because on using the polymers or making polymers from petroleum , there is a fear of you know depletion of petroleum resources .
So , current focus in polymer research is to make monomer and subsequent polymers from a natural sources , which could be a bio source or a source which can be renewed or the source by by renewal resources .
There is a focus also make this polymerization process green and environmental friendly where you avoid use of this toxic chemicals and gases like solvents and other things .
There is also emphasis of making new polymers of complicated structures which will find applications in newer especially in medicines and also this this is a continued research interest where you take existing polymers and add additive fillers , new additive fillers or different processing step , now improve processing include polymer processing where you you make this different improved application of or newer applications of the existing polymer .
And of course , there is a very highly important you know the more importance given specially from the government side about the waste management of polymers specially recycling of polymers and find the ways where you can we use the polymers and of course , the there is a need for research how to properly manage the polymer waste .
With this I we will stop this class .
In the coming class I will start with classifications of polymer .
Just to repeat what what I covered in this class , we talked about the definition of what are polymers ?
Polymers are large molecules , which is made from repetition of structural units .
We also learned why we should study polymers , polymers as you by now convinced that find applications in conventional applications as well as very newer applications , very high end applications and we also learned why nowadays polymer is used more and more applications , what are the good properties of polymers and why polymers are different , you know why polymers are get what what are the structural features of polymer gives you this is improved properties and then we also learned big picture .
Now , what are the different stages of polymers and then how the polymers are transformed from one stage to another and ultimately where how the polymer industry works and then we talked about finally about what are the important research areas in currently researcher focusing in polymer chemistry .
We will start in next class , continue the introduction and we start from the classification of polymers .
So far we have been talking about the kinetics of single substrate enzyme catalyzedreactions and as we all know that in the living cells a large variety of enzymes interact with the multiple substrates .
In fact most of the enzyme catalyzed reaction that do take place in a living cell involves two substrates in most cases .
We have also seen that under certain set of conditions the classical Michaelis Menten kinetics which has been proposed for single substrate enzymatic reactions can also be applied to bi - substrate reactions .
Certain conditions apply but those conditions are by and large extreme conditions .
That is you have to have one of the substrate in a very large excess concentration .
Those situations may not really exist in a living cell .
In a living cell the concentration of the two substrates that are to interact with the enzyme may be almost in an equal or near by concentration levels .
They may not be extremely different and therefore it is necessary to look at the actual effect of the bi - substrate reactions on the reaction rate .
Two of the examples which I have chosen here are one on alcohol dehydrogenase which oxidizes ethanol to acetaldehyde involving a co - enzyme NAD and the other is hexokinase catalyzed phosphorylation of glucose or any other hexose to the corresponding phosphorylated sugar .
Bulk of the bi - substrate reactions do fall in the category of either oxidoreductases or transferases or lipases .
Most of the hydrolytic enzymes isomerizes or often can be analyzed using classical Michaelis Menten kinetics .
The oxidoreductases represented by the first reaction or a transferase represented by hexokinase or in many cases the lipases are the real true bi - substrate reactions which in general should not be treated or analyzed with the Michaelis Menten kinetics .
To account for the rate of reaction for such reactions taking example of a typical bi - substrate reaction as I have shown here in general I have left certain dots in between , in between the substrate as well as the product stream .
Basically that signifies that the dynamics of the interaction between the enzyme and the substrate molecule may be quite varied unlike in the case of Michaelis Menten kinetics where you have a single substrate and it has to bind on the active site of the enzyme molecule and form an enzyme substrate complex .
Here because the substrates are more than one there are many possibilities for interaction between the substrate and the enzyme molecules and so therefore these dotted figures indicate a variety of interactions that are involved .
But in general the action of enzymes on a reaction involving two substrates A and B giving rise to products X and Y is expressed here .
A generalized rate expression for this was proposed by Alberty based on steady state hypothesis .
Again similar considerations as we talked about in the case of Michaelis Menten kinetics .
He proposed the initial reaction rate for such a reaction can be given by an expression given here .
Let us say this is expression one .
That is V0 = Vm.A.B Vm is the maximum reaction velocity where both the substrates A and B are in saturating concentrations .
That means both the substrates are in large quantity and they are able to saturate the enzyme which in concentration terms is much , much smaller than the A or B .
The concentration of enzyme is much , much smaller than either A or B .
Almost the same assumptions that we made in case of Michaelis Menten kinetics and the A and B can be to a saturating level providing a maximum reaction velocity .
The denominator term gives you another three kinetic parameters ; K ’ A is the dissociation constant of binding of E to A giving EA .
This is dissociation constant and KB and KA indicated here are the concentration of the substrates A and B respectively at which the reaction velocity is half the maximum reaction velocity at saturating level of the other substrate .
That means when we talk of KB , KB is that concentration of B at which the reaction velocity V is half of that of Vm at a saturating concentration of A .
Similarly for K that concentration of A at which the reaction velocity is half that of Vm at a saturating concentration of B .
Or in other words we are analogous to our classical Michaelis Menten constant for the substrate .
That means you can consider that KB is the Michaelis Menten constant with respect to B at saturating concentration of A .
There might be some confusion about KA and K ’ A .
K ’ A is the dissociation constant for binding of A to the enzyme .
KA is the corresponding Michaelis Menten constant with respect to A .
This distinction between the two will be more clarified or clear when we proceed ahead but such a situation exists in the case of bi - substrate reactions .
In most cases this dissociation constant is different than the apparent Michaelis Menten constant unlike in the case of single substrate reaction where the two are almost identical .
You will notice that the apparent Michaelis Menten constant will depend upon the concentration of the other substrate also and this dissociation does not depend upon the other substrate .
Out of the several mechanisms , in one of the mechanisms this K ’ A may be equal to K and the rate expression will accordingly get modified .
Under those conditions if you take the first expression you will notice that this can also be considered almost like as you mentioned earlier while looking at the validity of Michaelis Menten kinetics for bi - substrate reactions that if we put one of the substrate concentration in excess the expression can represent the bi - substrate reaction kinetically with respect to other substrate .
So therefore if let us say B is very large , B tends to infinity then V0 = Vm.A / KA + A Both from numerator and denominator divide by V some of the terms will be cancelled and you will end up with a simple expression like Michaelis Menten .
Similarly when A tends to infinity analogous expression will emerge V0 = Vm.B / KB + B So you get a similar expression in the case of excess concentration of or large concentration of one of the reactants and that was also the understanding we had when we discussed Michaelis Menten kinetics .
You can rearrange this general expression by taking certain factors and divide both and you can end up at the constant concentration of B .
If you consider B as a constant at some value of B the expression will turn out to be analogous to Michaelis Menten constant .
If this becomes a constant parameter , at constant B you can write Vm.A.B / ( KB + B ) V0 = ( K ’ A.KB + KA.B ) / ( KB + B ) + A We have rearranged the general equation in the form of Michaelis Menten expression .
So therefore at any constant value of B you can consider that the apparent value of Km for A KA is K ’ A.KB + KA.B KAapp = KB + B This is the apparent Km with respect to A by rearranging this general equation .
You notice the relationship between the apparent Km for A and K ’ A .
Although they are related it also involves the concentration term of the other substrate which is B and a similar relationship like this when you consider constant concentration of A and the apparent Km for B .
Or in other words in a special case when K ’ A = KA ; Kmapp = KA The relationship between these two terms implies that when they are same as the Michaelis Menten constant with respect to A it does not interfere and K ’ A = KA .
It has no effect on the binding of B and so it is independent of concentration of B in the reaction mixture .
Similar situation will apply if you consider K ’ A.KB + KB.A Kmapp for B = KA + A Again here also similarly you will notice K ’ A = KA ; Kmapp for B KB This here also K ’ A = KA .
It is with respect to first substrate binding .
Under this condition I am trying to give you an analogy or an explanation as to how KA and K ’ A are related .
If you consider the single substrate reaction the dissociation constant of substrate with the enzyme is analogous to Km value , whereas in the case of bi - substrate reaction that situation is not true .
That is only a special case of a bi - substrate reaction under which the Km apparent for B will become equal to KB when these two become equal .
Otherwise this value will be this magnitude although they will have a relationship but they will be a function of other substrate concentration .
The other substrate concentration will influence the magnitude of Kappm in the case of a bi - substrate reaction whereas in the case of a single substrate reaction the Km value was almost analogous under the assumption that the term turn over number that is K2 term is not very , very small .
That was the only assumption .
Otherwise if it is very small they have a difference but if it is not very small the two are analogous .
In the first case this should be KA .
You can also look at these expressions in a graphical mode and to have a better visualization .
In the first case when we are talking of constant B your profile will be something like this .
This is your maximum reaction velocity and your half Vm will be this one where KA apparent with respect to substrate A will be K ’ A.KB + KA.B KAapp = KB + B Similarly here this situation will become V0 when the value of B is saturating .
It will be Vm when the value of B is saturating .
At any other V value of B the rate profile will be a hyperbolic profile analogous to that of Michaelis Menten constant .
Similarly in the case of A constant you will have another Km value K ’ A.KB + KB.A Kmapp = KA + A Here also this is your constant A .
This will be a maximum reaction velocity when A becomes saturating .
Such a situation can be conceived as a simplification of Michaelis Menten system .
Another way to look at this kinetic expression is , just like we have been looking under all the cases of single substrate reaction , double reciprocal plots which will also give us the magnitude of all the kinetic parameters that are involved .
What will be the kind of the double reciprocal plot ?
In the case of a generalized rate expression one can just write 1 / V0 = ( 1 + KA / A + KB / B + K ’ A.KB / AB ) / Vm That is the double reciprocal plot if we divide both the numerator and denominator by A into B you will get rate expression .
If you plot this at a constant value of V just like in the first case when we take constant value of V , you will get a profile with B increasing at different constant value of V .
If B increases you will get a slope of KA + K ’ A.KB / B Vm The intercept on this factor will be 1 + KB / B Vm So you will notice that both slope as well as intercept of the profiles will decrease as you increase the value of B and ultimately when this B become saturating it will be a typical K value for the substrate A .
Experimentally the magnitude of KA , KB , K ’ A and Vm can be determined by double reciprocal plot analysis .
If you recall what we did in the case of the inhibition patterns , we took the double reciprocal plots and then took slopes and intercept and made secondary plot .
Similarly here if you plot 1 / B versus the magnitude of slope you will get again a straight line with the slope equal to K ’ A.KB / Vm and intercept of KA / Vm .
In the case of intercept the slope will be KB / Vm and intercept of 1 / Vm .
Therefore by a double reciprocal plot at different concentrations of B and plotting the 1 / B versus the slope and intercept one can determine the values of the four kinetic parameters that are involved in a bi - substrate reaction that is KA , KB , K ’ A and Vm .
These are the four kinetic parameters unlike in the case of a single substrate reaction where we are concerned only with two kinetic parameters Km and Vm .
One can determine experimentally , the various kinetic parameters in the case of a bi - substrate reaction .
You will notice that while looking at the generalized expression of the bi - substrate reaction rate expression we have not really bothered about the dynamics of enzyme substrate interaction .
We have just kept it in a black box some interaction takes place by which the products are formed and some general rate expression have been arrived at which involves certain kinetic parameters which have been considered in analogy to single substrate reaction because the kinetic analysis of enzyme catalyzed reactions have been so much dominated by Michaelis Menten kinetics that any new mechanism or any proposed mechanism must be interpreted in the light of those Km and Vm as parameters and that is what we have done .
We must also look at the possible kind of interactions that are likely to take place and almost all the interactions between enzyme and substrate for bi - substrate reactions have been classified into some general forms .
The first form , the first complex formation can be considered as the random ternary complex formation .
When we are talking of enzyme and two substrates there is a quite logical choice that we might end up instead of binary complex , a ternary complex where E , A and B all the three are combined together before a product formation takes place .
When I talk of ternary complex formation I am referring to a ternary complex formation before the product is formed .
In the case of random ternary complex formation the enzyme can form binary complex EA and EB to start with and also the ternary complex EAB with no restriction on the order in which A and B bind to the enzyme .
It can start by binding first with the A and then B will hook on to that or it can start with EB and then A will hook on to that or in other words that you will notice just like in the case of the non competitive inhibition the A and B both have separate binding sites on the enzyme molecule and therefore they don ’ t interfere with each other and randomly they can bind and once the ternary complex formation has taken place the product formation will begin .
You can express it in a mechanistic way the enzyme going to EA or EB and EAB and this four this will go in cyclic form .
EAB then goes to form your E plus X plus Y .
E k1 k4 k - 1k - 4 EA EB k - 2 k - 3 k2 EAB E + X + Y There will be rate constant at this state k1 , k - 1 , k2 , k - 2 , k3 , k - 3 , k4 and k - 4 .
Either reaction can go in this direction or in this direction there is no constraint on the order of the ternary complex formation .
Typical example is yeast alcohol dehydrogenase which follows such a kind of mechanism .
Another typical feature is that the kinetic parameters of the same enzyme which catalyses the same reaction from two different sources are different .
For example yeast alcohol dehydrogenase follows a random ternary complex formation as a part of the dynamics of their enzyme substrate interaction whereas the same enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase from the mammalian cells doesn ’ t follow this kind of mechanism ; it follows an ordered mechanism where it can bind only to one of the substrate first before the second substrate can bind and that ’ s why the kinetic parameter will automatically turn out to be different .
One of the reasons in such cases is based on the different reaction mechanisms that are involved .
Similarly yeast hexokinase also follows this kind of mechanism where the ternary complex formation is obtained .
They may be equal to in some cases or they may not be equal to because ultimately the multiplication of the two dissociation constant in reaching to EAB will be same .
In specific cases they may be equal also .
But we have just put the different rate constants .
The second case again with respect to ternary complex formation is ordered ternary complex formation .
Here the ternary complex EAB can be formed from only one of the complex EA .
I have taken hypothetically EA it could be EB also and only one of the binary complex has to trigger the enzyme substrate interaction and then the other substrate will interact with the EA complex .
In other words if you write down the reaction mechanism EA this is k1 , k - 1 and then this will go to EAB and this is k2 and k - 2 .
The reaction cannot proceed in this direction that is B cannot bind to the free E and the reaction has to proceed in an anticlockwise fashion that means after E has bound to A , B will bind to EA , EAB will be formed and ultimately this will form EY releasing one of the products let us say X and then this will release another product Y and they will be let us say k3 , k4 .
But the product formation will take place only after the ternary complex formation has begun .
The process in this direction is not feasible .
A typical example of the ordered ternary complex formation as I mentioned is liver alcohol dehydrogenase which is obtained in the mammalian systems and also lactate dehydrogenase is another example of ordered ternary complex formation .
You can see that the same alcohol dehydrogenase can follow different mechanisms .
A special case of ordered ternary complex formation is Thorell and Chance mechanism because in many of the enzyme catalyzed reactions , Thorell and Chance observed that ternary complex is not a very stable entity and it exists only for a short period of time .
A special case of ordered ternary complex formation when B reacts with EA ; the order is important .
We can only react with enzyme only when A has bound to it to form and one of the products is released and the modified enzyme substrate complex is generated .
That means a modified enzyme substrate complex is generated and a first product has been released without the formation of a stable ternary complex of kinetic significance .
That means the half life of the ternary complex is very , very small in this scheme .
Although they never said that the ternary complex formation doesn ’ t take place , they agreed that ternary complex formation is taking place but the half life of the ternary complex is very small and before that the second substrate can interact with the EA to form the first product .
Or in other words you can have E again going to EA and then this EA can then convert into EY releasing a product X and then this EY can give you back E releasing another product Y and you can have k1 , k - 1 , k2 and k3 .
Such a kind of a system where although the second substrate B reacts with EA to give you the first product and the ternary complex is not a very stable entity is classified into the Thorell and Chance mechanism .
A typical example of such a reaction is glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase which you also come across in the case of glycolysis .
But it is only a special case of an ordered mechanism where ordered ternary complex formation is not denied .
One can also consider either as a special case of ternary complex formation or a special case of binary complex formation .
But binary complex cannot lead to a product .
The second substrate has to interact with the binary complex before the first product can arrive at but the stable intermediates are only EA and EY .
The fourth mechanism which represents the binary complex formation is Ping - Pong mechanism .
You will also notice that in many books it is written as Ping - Pong bi - bi mechanism .
The term bi - bi refers to substrate and product .
Bi - bi means two substrates and two products .
In case of many of the ligases the situation may be bi - uni .
That means the product may be one the substrates may be two .
All those cases are clubbed under Ping - Pong mechanism and in this case of Ping - Pong mechanism the basic hypothesis is that no ternary complex is formed .
As soon as the first substrate binds to the enzyme it can react to form the B to form a product or it can split off to a product E .
You will notice that the two things like Thorell and Chance mechanism and the Ping - Pong mechanism in some way might show analogy .
That means as soon as the EA of the first binary complex is formed the interaction with the second substrate forms a product , first product or it splits off to a product and a modified enzyme substrate complex which then reacts with B to form Y .
Therefore E reacts with A to form EA with k1 and k - 1 .
Right at this stage itself the product will be formed which is X and this will be EA ’ and this is k2 .
EA ’ then interacts with B to give you EA ’ B and then this gives you a product again which is Y with k3 and k4 .
As soon as the first binary subjects complex is formed one of the product is released .
Then the next substrate interacts and the next product is released .
So that is what happens in such cases and a large number of transferases , most of the bulk of tranferases fall in the category of ping pong reaction mechanism excepting those of the yeast source and most of the mammalian hexokinases form under the category of ping pong .
They lead to the classification of ping pong mechanism .
When we look into these mechanisms and develop steady state rate expressions specifically you will end up in quite complex situations .
EA ’ is hypothetical in the sense it may not be a binary complex .
It will be more clear it is E ’ , the enzyme in the modified form .
The first substrate has reacted and released the product .
Enzyme is modified and second substrate attacks and then releases another product .
That would be a better interpretation .
Whereas in the case of Thorell and Chance mechanism this will be a binary complex , this will not be a modified enzyme .
When we look at these reaction mechanisms with the increased order of complexity between the dynamics of enzyme substrate interaction , the rate expression will also be quite complex if you put them in terms of individual rate constants .
Each of the reaction mechanism involves particularly the random ternary complex formation will involve nine rate constants four reversible and one irreversible step , nine rate constant and the expression will be quite complex .
In practice to derive expression may be quite complex and we are talking only a binary substrate complex formation that might be enzymatic reaction which may involve three substrates and system will be still more complex .
Before I go to give you the rate expression for these different mechanisms I like to introduce you to a simplified methodology for writing a rate expression under a steady state hypothesis .
Of course the steady state hypothesis is valid .
The method was proposed by King and Altmen way back in 1956 .
They analyzed number of reaction mechanisms and using matrix algebra they wrote down rate expression for different kinetic mechanisms and all steady state expressions can be solved out .
Ultimately making some generalizations from those matrix algebra , Wong and Hans in 1962 proposed certain set of simplified rules almost like empirical rules .
Although they are based on hard core mathematics matrix algebra he generalized certain rules so that by observation of the reaction mechanism as long as you can write a reaction mechanism one can arrive at a rate expression in a simplistic way .
I will try to introduce you with that kind of a system taking a simple example so that , that can be applied to our complex binding substrate system to arrive at the actual rate expressions .
The kind of system we will take for simplicity will be a two enzyme substrate complex formation ES going to ET going to E plus P .
k1 k2 k3 E + S ES ET E + P k - 1 k - 2 k - 3 We can take a reversible system k1 , k - 1 , k2 , k - 2 , k3 , k - 3 .
To illustrate the procedure followed I chose this reaction mechanism .
The very first step in such a procedure as proposed by Wong and Hans is that we need to write any reaction mechanism in a cyclic form .
Cyclic form means you will have inter conversions of the enzyme substrate complexes .
For example here as you notice enzyme species can exist in the form of E , ES and ET in three forms .
So the whole reaction mechanism can be interpreted in the form of a triangle with three vertices , each vertex representing one of the enzyme species .
Therefore you can write such a reaction mechanism as E , ES and ET .
Now show the inter convention of each of the enzyme species say for example E ES , ES ET and ET E .
ES E ET Let us say this is your Sk1 , k - 1 , k2 , k - 2 , k3 and pk - 3 .
We write the rate constant for all these steps in the cyclic form making them in the kind of a first order rate constant .
For example wherever there is substrate involved in binding over enzyme the rate constant can be written as Sk1 .
Where there is no substrate involved only simple rate constant can be written and similarly wherever ET is going to form the product in the reverse direction , the product concentration will be incorporated The inter conversions of the enzyme forms involved in each step must be described by a term called Kappa .
The conversion of the rate constant or interpreting each of these steps in terms of first order rate constant term is called Kappa .
Then we consider each enzyme species in sequence .
For example we take E and consider all the possible pathways by which E is formed in this cyclic manner .
E can be formed by all the possible pathway involving n - 1 steps .
That means if there are three enzyme species number of species are n and n - 1 steps will be involved in each pathway .
We identify that E can be formed by this and this .
Similarly you can form this and this .
Write all the possible pathways which are feasible to form and this is for E .
What I am trying to explain is that for each of the enzyme species write down all the path ways involving n - 1 steps .
That means if it is a three enzyme species system , if there are three enzyme species in the system then each path way must consist of two steps which can form the enzyme species E or any enzyme species which we are considering .
One of the considerations in such a system is that all the path ways that converges at a particular enzyme species are permissible .
But the path way which leaves the enzyme species in both directions is not permissible .
That is a system like this will not be permissible if it happens .
Are you clear ?
For each of the enzyme species we work out the path way by which these species may be synthesized .
Each path way must consist of n - 1 steps where n is the number of enzyme species present and the product of the kappas of the steps in each pathway is determined .
You can write the kappas here and you can have the kappa product .
For example what is the kappa product for this pathway ?
pk - 1 , k - 3 .
This pathway is represented by this and this .
So the product of this Kappa is this .
In this case it is k - 2 and k - 1of this one and the third path way will be pk2 k - 3 .
We are talking of E .
In this expression we are writing for the formation of the enzyme species E .
These arrows represent this and this .
sk1 does not form E .
sk1 form ES .
k - 2 forms E by ES .
What we mentioned is that we are considering only pathways which have two steps n - 1 steps and any steps which lead to formation of E involving two steps will be considered .
First pathway involves two steps this one and this one .
They are only the steps which are involved in formation of E .
They are just generalized rules .
Otherwise you have to go to the matrix algebra to solve the simultaneous equations and you will arrive at the same thing .
Wong and Hans simplified the whole matrix algebra did by King and Altmen and formed certain rules .
He said that you form a cyclic reaction mechanism and write down the pathway for each of the enzyme species or for example we can take any simpler case let us take probably the simplest case E plus P .
E + S ES E + P k1 , k - 1 and k2 .
I try to write this one using the same you will arrive at for the same expression as Michaelis Menten equation .
For such simple system writing by observation will look to be more difficult than solving the steady state equation but if you have let us say more than one enzyme substrate complex it may look to be simpler to write by observation .
‘ n ’ represents the number of enzyme species involved in the mechanism , whereas in the case of what I showed we have three enzyme species E , ES and ET .
It will be expressed in the cyclic form by a triangle each enzyme species represented on the vertex of the triangle and each of the path way which should be considered for the formation of enzyme species must have n - 1 steps .
This is how you define a pathway .
It ’ s not a pathway in the sense of metabolic pathway .
It ’ s the number of steps involved in formation of that each having n - 1 step .
So I think we will stop at this point .
Welcome to this 12th lecture of course in Polymer Chemistry .
And in this lecture I plan to continue the discussion on chain transfer reaction and their implications .
And then we talk about the inhibition and retardation reactions , we talk about how to determine or what is the procedure of determination of different reaction rates , rate of initiation , rate of termination rate of polymerization .
And we talk about and discuss now how to determine the rate constant different rate constant , and we will discuss about their magnitudes and we go next to the auto acceleration gel effect .
And then finally we will talk about effect of temperature and polymerization rate and as well as effect of temperature and molecular weight of polymers .
In last lecture we introduced different types of chain reactions possible and we also convince our self that if there is a chain transfer reaction , expect if the chain transfer is by the reaction with a polymer chain dead polymer chain .
In all other cases the chain transfer happens then molecular weight will come down .
And we also introduced the term kinetic chain length how it is related to the average number number average degrees of polymerization .
And how we can determine the number of residual initiator residues per chain and how that is related to the number of degrees of polymerization .
Now , let us continue the discussion having the last lecture on the chain transfer reaction .
Now , we had discussed this , these molecules and their reactivity , now as we are discussing that if the more stable radical will have a tendency to react or undergo transfer reaction compared to the less stable one .
Now , let us look at the values of this solvents C s is the chain transfer constant for the solvent .
So , the higher the value the higher is the tendency for that solvent to undergo transfer reaction .
Now , we have listed here the values for two monomers , polymerization two monomers polymerization styrene and polymerization of vinyl acetate .
And look at the value , you will know that this is the more stable radical then this secondary radical then this one then this and in this case because again this is a primary radical .
So , this stability would be similar to stability of this radical .
So , look at the number again benzene cyclohexane toluene if you increase go toluene to ethyl benzene isopropyl benzene the tendency of transfer reaction goes up .
And again we go to tarsalbutyl benzene , because again it is a primary radical , we are talking about if the tendency of transfer reaction goes down .
Now , this happens to vinyl acetate as well , but look at the comparison between vinyl acetatestyrene , vinyl acetates are the numbers for vinyl acetate are R , so higher .
So , tendency of the solvents for transfer reaction for vinyl acetate is higher compared to a polymer reaction of styrene .
Now , what could be reason between the difference in this tendency of the solvent towards different monomers , again as we discussed in the last lecture if this propagating radical is very reactive .
Then obviously , it will react for both the monomer as well as the solvent in this case if it is less reactive then it will choose the most feasible root .
Now , between styrene radical the propagating radical from astyrene polymerization , vinyl acetate polymerization this is much more reactive compared to a styrene radical generated from styrene molecule .
So , this will react much more to with the solvent molecule in this case .
So , that is the reason this is this transfer constant as much higher value compared to styrene .
So , if we want to list or rank between different monomers , the rank of the reactivity would be something like this it is vinyl chloride higher than vinyl acetate , acrylo nitrile methyl acrylate , methyl methacrylate styrene and so on .
So , you can yourself from your knowledge from organic chemistry you can justify this ranking , because this is the most reactive radical generates from vinyl chloride will be much reactive compared to the other ones .
This lacks any significant stabilization mechanism either by resonance or by inductive effect , whereas , a styrene will have stabilization radical generated from styrene will have the stabilization by resonance .
So , the reactivity of that radical will come down .
Now , this is this ranking does not hold always there are cases where there is a specific interaction or putting a affinity between monomer molecule plus solvent , there is specific affinity between this .
If for example , if the monomer is electron donor it will have more tendency to react with a solvent which is electron acceptor , whereas if the monomer is a electron acceptor it will have a tendency to react with electron donating solvent , for let us compare between two monomer and two solvent and see whether , we can justify or we can have this verified from the experimental data .
Now , I consider tri ethyl amine as a solvent now it is electron reach , so electron and c c l 4 which is electron acceptor solvent .
Now , I compare between acrylonitrile and vinyl acetate , now acrylonitrile is a electron accepting monomer , where this is electron .
So , obliviously this will have more tendency for react or undergoing transfer reaction with c c l 4 than trim ethylamine .
And between this two monomers acrylonitrile have more tendency to undergoing transfer reaction with amine compared to vinyl acetate .
So , if you compare the values and put a third monomer M M a methyl methacrylate which is again a electron accepting monomer and let us see whether it is more generic .
So , acrylonitrile will prefer reacting with this as a transfer reaction compared to this whereas , vinyl acetate will be reacting more with this than this .
So , compare vinyl acetate it has more tendency to transfer reaction with C C L 4 , but the acrylonitrile has more tendencyto undergoing tri methylamine .
Now , between then comes a competition for same solvent two monomers because this is donor it will have more reacting transfer reaction tendency with acrylonitrile .
So , if you look tri ethyl amine the value is higher for acrylonitrile than vinyl acetate .
So , you can justify the values for methyl methacrylate , which is again a electron accepting monomer .
So , in what is the utility of transfer reaction or what is what it can help you in this learning on transfer reaction if .
Say if you are your trying to polymerize a monomer and then at the end you are not able to get the H high enough molecular weight which you planned from your experiment .
Then what are the possibilities it could happen if it does not build molecular weight ; that means , and you know that from the monomer structure that it is it is polymerizable by say radical polymerization root .
Then it there could be transfer reactions happening it could be happening with monomer initiator or solvent or they could be impurities present in the reaction medium .
Now , if you can remove you can do the reaction once again remembering all the impurities and still if you can get or you do not get the higher molecular weight , then what you need to look for is the structure for initiator and the monomers solvent .
Whether they can take part in the transfer reactions and you have to rule out the possibilities , if you rule out all the possibilities have the transfer reactions by appropriate choosing the initiator and the solvent .
Then you can you can built the moleculate if it is the transfer reaction is because the monomer then then there is no other alternative we have choose different monomer al together .
If there is a transfer reaction is happening with the monomer .
Then they is other way you can build them monomer molecular weight , because you have use the monomers to meet the polymer .
Now , if you found in the reaction they is high very high molecular weight , which you do not what then what you can do you can use this chain transfer agents which we have .
Now , what would be the chain good transfer agent which can easy participate in chain transfer reactions and those does molecules like S S N thiol , now containing S S N thiol .
For example , if I look the values for one butane thiol this number is very high , because in this case this is a very week bound .
So , easy this hydrogen can be very easy accept by the propo vinyl acetate radicals , why using this type of chain transfer tri ethyl are butane thiol compounds the compounds you can reduce are control your molecular weight much to of your choose or if your target .
Now , if you look at this solvents carbon tetra chloride and carbon tetra boride they are also have very high chain transfer constant .
That means , this solvents are very poor solvents if you want to build higher molecular weight in the radical polymerization .
The reason for this monomers are the solvents to participate in chain transfer reaction is because of there stability of stabilization of the resulting irons .
So , if I have for example , I talk about one participating transfer reaction it produce this radical .
Now , this is can be easy stabilized by all this roaming molecular , which can participation the reguise instructed .
So , this that is the reason that this type of solvent carbon tetra chloride and in specially carbon tetra boride participation the chain transfer reaction very much high extent .
So , always avoid in this type of solvent for alginated only in that sense because alginated solvent will always breezily it can be easily acceptable .
Now , always its try to avoid these acrylonitrile solvent specially for this carbon tetra chloride and carbon tetra boride type solvents .
Now , if I look at that transfer reaction one more time , so if I take a mu , so YB inter x a am writing YB and now it is producing M n Y plus B dot , k z is the red constant for reaction .
Now , if this b dot which is this radical is very stable that it is does not take part in further reaction , further chain in reaction , it might degrade or it may react with itself forming non radical sphere .
But , it does not react with the monomers to initiate he chain molecules a new chain or if it is at all reactive with monomer the rate is very , very small which means practically in this reaction transfer reaction you are producing a death chain .
Even if you are producing an radical which is as good as death death chain , because it is not talking part in initiation of a mu chain .
In this case what happen if k z is much higher then k p which means that this reactions this happening at much higher extent compare to the normal propagation reaction then you will not have a polymer at all , because as soon as this chain initiate it will react with this and form a death chain .
So , we will not have at all any polymers , so polymer is get inhibited .
So , it is a inhibition reaction and this YB is a inhibitor if k z is little higher or may be comparable with k p , then are even part of the M n is under going this reaction and part of the M n is undergoing normal propagation reaction .
So , what happen your rate of polymerization it become slower , so this is retardation and the molecule called retardence .
For example , if I talk about a self initiated thermal polymerization , polymerization of benzene styrene a 100 degree centigrade this is percentage of conversation and this is time , is normally have reaction rate of reaction like this by time more propagation happenings .
So , more monomer is undergoing polymerization reaction , so higher is the conversation .
If I had this is 0 percent any external molecule there is no external molecule in this case , if it is 0 percent 0.1 percent benzoquinone , benzoquinone this is benzoquinone .
So , what happen for some time there is no polymerization reaction at all the monomers is not consuming at all , which means as soon as radical is form it is reacting with your benzoquinone present .
So , there is no polymer no monomer is converting in to polymer once this benzoquinone is over then the polymerization reaction start normally .
Now , this is a typical example how this common monomers are shift or store , because most monomers when there are shift from between different countries are locally there are stabilized with small amount of this inviters .
For example , hydroquinone or benzoquinone , because there should not self polymerizes either by little bit of heat oil from the binateor or by self initiation reaction .
So , when you do reaction base to s to disallowed that benzoquinone hydroquinone stabilizer or inviter or you can add little excess initiator compensating the inviter molecule .
So , that we do the reaction till all the benzoquinone and hydroquinone gets consume after that normal reaction happens .
There is a third possibility is like this 0.5 percent nitrobenzene nitro benzene in this case reactions starts from beginning , but with the much smaller rate .
So , it is a example of a retardation there would be four possible , which is a combination of inhibition and retardation something like this a starts at a sometimes as well as the reaction is slower , this happens if we add 0.2 percent nitro benzene .
So , this as a the reaction possible with different types of this is the typical or happen if your inhibitor or retardation or a combination of both of that and examples of inhibitors again this is when this radicals is very stable .
For example , if I have a butyl butylated hydroxy toluene , when this forms a radical where from a hydrogen you can am not writing you can imagine that the dot will come here .
And which is extremely stable radical which does not participate in the nutrition reaction it might degrade or react with self , but it does not participate example of a inhibitor .
The other example is like 2 2 Di Phanyl Picryl Hydrazyl DPPH , when it reacts with this this is extremely it does not react with any monomer it reacts with the only radicals and form a non radical specious this benzo hydroquinone can react with a propagating radical .
And from either this or this radical both of the , which her resitable radical .
So , that is a reason there act as a inhibitor molecule .
Another very common inhibitor which we come across at always is oxygen .
This can react with this self form non radical specious and this can form with other M n dot and can form a non radical specious .
So , that is the reason , that the transfer coefficient or or the transfer constant is very high for the reaction that is the tendency of oxygen molecule to undergo this reaction is very extremely high .
So , which means that when you do reactions chain polymerization reaction , radical chain polymerization reaction is must remove the oxygen molecule from the reaction medium as much as possible .
To avoid this killing of the radical propagating radical by which it will stop the reaction and also reduce the molecular weight .
So , we have now learnt transfer reaction and inhibitor inhibition relation and retardation reaction as well ; now let us talk about how one determine this different rates experimentally by experiment .
Now , R p which is the disappears of the monomer or reaction of monomer from the reaction medium , you can directly determined the monomers consideration by talking a alicot from the reaction medium .
And precipitating the polymer and then waying the polymer to find out the healed , which means waste is the monomer , so by which you can know what is the monomer present or how much monomer is reacted directly do at from a solution .
So , direct aligcot can be taken at different time M and the polymer can be fastigiated out from the reaction ; second you can directly measure the concentration either by spectroscopic technique or any chemical techniques .
Now , it can be applied not only for radical polymerization these experiments can be done for step polymerization as well .
Where you can stop the reaction in between and find out the functional group , in case of step polymerization by in case of these is the conservation monomer molecule , so from this you can get the value of R p .
Now , we get it once s more time this the expression for k p is just for your reminder that this is this .
So , we know this now from the experiment and we can find out the concentration of aim as well , so this k p and M dot are the two unknown quantities .
Now , this M dot in in theory or in principle can be found out directly from a sides measurements which get the total initiator concentration specially at that stage , this stage .
For because the life time or the life time of this radicals are very small is normal user technique is not very accurate to find out the concentration or M M dot the valve of M dot .
So , a sides does not give a very accurate results of the M dot value .
Now , we know R I is minus d I by d t .
So , we can find out the I initiator molecule concentration of time , so we know we know the value of R I .
So , we know value of R I we also can find out the value of I .
So , we know the value of f k d this known now this is known this is known , so you know this is for thermal thermal polymerization .
So , you we can write the expression one more time for the rate of polymerization for thermal polymerization is k d I by k t to the power half .
Now , in this expression e e know this , we know this we know this , we know this , we know this , this is all known .
So , what is unknown is k p by k t by half , so this is unknown quality , rest of the things we know from experiment .
Now , how do we get this , to get this we found the average life time we defined average life time of a radical at steady state at steady state tau s is the concentration of total radical species as steady state by the rate of termination square or 1 by 2 k t .
So , now , this can be we can put this value of R p here , so we can get k p M by twice k t R p at steady state , so if you know tau s we know k p by R p .
So , from the value of tau s we know k p by k t this is known this is known , so this by this as to be unknown this is unknown .
So , we know this , so we know this we know this if we both are known then obviously k t is known and k t is known k p is also known , so this is the logic .
Now , how do you determine this there two establish method , one is rotating sector method and second is PLPSEC , which is Pals Laser Polymerization Size Exclusion Comotography plases lesere polymerization size exsultion conmoetrgraphi .
Now , am not going in to detain about this method how there how there use to determine the value of tau s , but because this is not the scope of the courses , but if for your knowledge that this are the method are applied to get the value of tau s .
And now once you know the value of tau s we know this and we know from this expression this , so we know k p k t .
So , now we know that by experimentally we can know the rates the individual rates we know R I , we know R p , we know R t and we also know k d , k p , k t we know all this from experiments .
Now , what is the typical values of this what are the typical values for radical polymerization R I is twice f k d I k d is 10 to the power minus 6 10 to the power 4 second typically used .
So , R t comes around similarly r P M M dot M dot value typically is between 10 to the power minus 9 to the 10 to the power minus 7 hole square liter , k p is 10 to the power 2 10 to the power 4 liter mole inverse second inverse so R p value is R p value is minus 4 by minus 6 mole detain inverse .
And R t is twice k t M dot square M dot value is listed here , k t his 10 to the power 6 10 to the power 8 liter whole inverse second inverse .
See , if you compare the values typical this are the typical values now the values would be different for different monomers and solvent choices .
And also it would vary on depend it would vary on various methods , we have utilized to determine this values .
So , depends on the method depends on the monomers and the choice of solvent , but this are the typical values of the different rate constant and rates .
Now , look at this number k d is very small where k p is much higher compare to k d .
So , the destination are the initiation reaction is very slow k p is first .
So , the propagation reaction is fast and termination reaction is much faster .
But , it does mean the rate all rate of termination is faster because the concentration of M dot his very low rate constant is very high the intrinsic the reaction his intrinsic very fast but because the concentration of the radically specious is very low the rate of termination is also low and that actually enables is to reach a steady state .
So , again just for one more time that the initiation rate constant his much lower compare to a propagation chain propagation which is much faster reaction very termaist much faster even faster reaction .
But , at this state there rate of rate of inhibition and rate of termination becomes 12 because the concentration of M dot is much lower it is about 10 to the power minus 8 moles per liter .
Now , what are the assumption if did use this expression R p his k p a M , what are the assumption we made one was that initiation was slow , propagation his fast and termination was even faster .
We had convinced our self now with the values of individual rate constant that our assumption was not , not in accurate assumption was accurate .
We also assume that the individual rate constant for the propagation steps where equal .
That means , the reactivity of a propagating radical towards a monomer does not depend among the length of the polymer chain at the end of which the radical is present .
And we have found that to be true as well what we did not , which we did not consider is that giving polymer reaction , we know that is a H O thermic reaction .
Now , once the H O thermic reaction happen , if we do not have arrangements to take out that heat which his evolve chain the reaction , then there will be change in temperature .
If we cannot take out that heat which his generated by the exothermic reaction giving the polymerization process why effectively , then the temperature is raise and once the temperature we raise all this red constant will also vary .
So , the rate of polymerization is also vary , if we cannot take out this the heat which is generated due to polymerization reaction that we did not consider did using at this steady state kinetics .
Now , if I consider this then how this rate will look like .
So let us plot R p verses conversation for a bulk polymerization ; that means , 100 percent polymerization again , remember R p is k p M M dot .
Now , initially before the steady state happened M dot increase slowly before it steady state happen .
So , with very low conversation to take little time to , so that his the transient non steady state , before the steady state happen .
This transient happen this is the transient is is transient it does in take much longer time , does not take too much conversation to achieve that .
Now , once this steady state reached R t will be all most constant , but with time what happen to concentration aim , monomer consideration decreases steady state means the concentration of M dot is fixed the time .
So , no change in the concentration of M dot this is constant and steady state , but with more and more reaction happening , more and more conversion is happening .
M n M should put down concentration monomer should go down , so R p go down slowly , so it go down slowly .
Now , if at this movement the the medium viscosity is quite high what happened if the if the medium viscosity as become very high , so that the chains are not diffusing at the same rate when the viscosity was lower .
Now , we know to termination to happen termination is a by molecular reaction between say to to propagate radical , we know termination would be by add a coupling or by this propagation reaction .
Now , if this two cannot defuse fasten off to find each other and react then obviously the termination rate will come down , it will become diffusion control ; that means , the intrinsic is very fast .
But , the rate at which this two radical his finding each other is determined the diffusivity of the this molecules .
So , the termination reaction becomes diffusion control the higher is the diffusion higher is the termination reaction , but because the medium viscosity is quit high , so diffusion rate is low .
So , the termination reaction his low now once the termination reaction his low steady state is lost .
So , more and more radicals are not terminated now because here the termination his come down , so the concentration of M dot increase .
Because , the viscosity is very high if the reaction the termination reaction his become diffusion control it is difficult that the propagating radical finding difficult to by other propagating propagating radicals to undergo a by molecular termination reaction .
So , the reaction the concentration of the radical the propagating radical goes up .
Now , once this concentration goes up what happen to the rate if this goes up rates goes up rates goes up now we know del H is negative exothermic reaction , once rate goes up goes up more and more heat involved and more heat involved means will know in a minute that of if we increase the temperature the medium rate of polymerization even goes up .
So , whatever if there auto acceleration is happening because rates goes up rate of polymerization goes up more heat is generated more heat is generated we cannot take out effectively that because the medium is high .
So , temperature goes up as a temperature goes up rate of polymerization again goes up , as a rate of polymerization goes up more and more heat is generated .
So , basically there is auto acceleration the rates zooms the rate of polymerization becomes to much accelerated as a results you get a gel at the end .
So , you get a gel is very high viscous material , so it is a gel effect this called gel effect , this is gel effect or is called effect , this is steady state .
Now , for a bulk polymerization this rates comes down rustically at the end will come and discuss why in a minute from now .
So , this is in a actual case if the rate of polymerization depends on the conversation , now obviously this gel effect whether it will exists or if exists at what conversion that will depend upon the viscosity of the medium .
If you are doing reaction in the solution then if you are concentration in the monomer in the solution is slower , then viscosity does in go up that much and because the polymers are forming in a solution the heat management is very good .
So , there is not heat acumination as a low increase in temperature , so the gel effect does not happen .
So , we plot a methyl methylacrylate polymerization at 50 degree centigrade in benzene by benzoquinone polyoxide initiator it is look like this time percentage conversion .
It is basically gives the rate of the polymerization times verses conversion gives you rate of polymerization .
When the 10 percent monomer in the solution the reaction you are doing in a dilute condition the heat management is very good , viscosity is not high , so no gel effect happen .
If you do it in a little higher say about 40 percent you get like this if you say 60 percent is the 60 percent monomer in the solution , you gel effect 80 percent you get even before the this 100 , 100 percent conversion , this is bulk .
This conversion verses time gives you rate of polymerization if you do it at a 10 percent concentration then the rate goes down slowly , but no gel effect happen if does in happen for 40 percent as well .
What if the concentration of the monomer is very high 60 percent , then there is a gel effect .
If it is even higher the viscosity for the medium becomes very high even at low conversion at lower time .
At 80 percent at gel effect initiates as much lower conversation at lower time or even for bulk which is 100 percent monomer it happens even before that .
So , you are now convinced or you understand this understood this concept .
Now , one thing you might have noticed that for 100 percent bulk whether 80 or 60 percent it as reached a 100 percent conversion of the monomer where for the bulk polymerization 100 percent of the monomer as not reacted and make polymers , it as not polymerized 100 percent .
All the monomers present in the medium there have not polymerized , now what would be the reason now we know glass transition temperature I have not discussed in this till now will discussed in later .
But , time being glass transition is a temperature at which a polymer becomes soft below which polymer become glassy .
So , the mobility of the polymer chains becomes very low below the glass transition temperature the mobility of the polymer segments is very low and they have no translation emotion there is no translation movement of the polymer molecules .
Now if you do the reaction at the temperature which is below T g now T g for polymethyl methyl acrylate is little excess then 100 is close to 100 .
So , if you do a reaction say at 50 degree centigrade or 60 degree centigrade that his below the T g glass transition temperature .
Now , T g of the polymer also becomes slower in presences of solvent in this case M M a as a monomer , which is called plasticization which is basically the reduction of T g in presences of any solvent in this case solvent is the monomer itself .
So , it is Tg is drops down as long as reaction temperature is below above T g of the polymer in that condition the chains or mobility .
So , the kinetic chains have mobility .
So , there can react with the monomer and participate in a polymerization reaction the movement the reaction temperature becomes below of the T g of the polymers in that medium the polymers lose all the mobility .
So , reaction stops the polymers becomes classy , so no low reactions can happen .
And this reduction of T g from original 100 degree for polymethyl methyl acryculate we be lower reduction means the T g value will becoming down more and more if you have more and more monomer in the medium .
So , if you increase the conversation that may be more and more polymer forming less and less monomer present in the medium then means the T g of the polymer present is becoming higher and higher because you are reducing the amount of monomer present in the media .
So , if I this is temperature and this is 100 degree centigrade is your T g for t n M a in this case this is mole friction of the polymer , if this monomer mole fraction of the polymer is one then the T g would be 100 degree centigrade for the pure polymer .
If you have little amount of monomer then T g will come down plasticization will happen more monomer more plasticization .
So , you if you draw T g with mole fraction you are going to get like this , so this your glassy part .
So , you have to carry out reaction the temperature below above glass transition temperature and you the glass transition temperature come down with more and more monomer present in the system of the polymerization medium .
So , in the bulk polymerization as this is the point where the T g as become lower T g of that polymer present in this case as become higher then the reaction temperature if the reaction temperature is 60 degree in this case 50 degree .
So , reaction m is 50 degree for T g this polymers as become higher than 50 degree , so no more conversation can happen ; at this conversation T g of this polymer present T g of the polymethyl methyl acrylate present here at become higher then 50 degree which is the reaction medium .
So , once the polymer become glassy then the polymer chain the kinetic chain are not participate for the reaction and cannot take the cannot make new polymers .
So , in this glassy region the polymer cannot the temperature is below the glass transition it cannot make any more further any more it can take up participate in further polymerization .
So , what we going to do in the next lecture is we what to find out the effect of temperature in the polymerization rate .
And also the effect of temperature on the molecular weight of the resulting polymer and will talk about thermodynamics of the chain radical chain polymerization in the next lecture .
We will continue today our discussion on enzymatic catalysis and particularly the ways in which the enzyme can lower the free energy of activation of a chemical reaction it catalysis .
In our earlier lecture we have noted that enzymes can lower the free energy of activation of a reaction very effectively as compared to chemical catalyst .
However this catalytic efficiency is attributed to two major molecular strategies that we had discussed earlier and they are binding of the substrates to the enzyme on the active site mainly the major play ground here is active site present on the enzyme molecule .
On the other hand the stabilization of the transition state of the chemical reaction which is the desired reaction which you want to catalyze .
These are the two molecular strategies which are responsible for the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme .
Here I like to draw your attention about active site .
You see in both cases the active site on the enzyme molecule play a very key role in the variety of functions or variety of mechanisms that we will discuss today .
Before we go in to main mechanism I like to summarize some of the characteristic features of enzyme active sites at least the major one which may be of interest in today ’ s lecture .
The enzyme active sites determines the catalytic properties and specificity of the enzyme and these properties are determined by the chemical groups attributed by the amino acids present on the particular small region what we understand as active site .
This region , the so called active site may constitute less than 5 % of the total surface area present on the enzyme protein .
It ’ s a very small area on the total enzyme surface and rest of the enzyme surface either in its proximity provides some favorable reactions or very often it may be considered as only a sort of building framework structural feature which creates the active site .
The creation of active site on the surface of an enzyme molecule is brought about by tertiary folding of the enzyme protein .
All the enzymes we talk about are all globular proteins , structural proteins are not involved in catalysis and therefore the rest of the amino acids by virtue of their folding pattern creates certain niches , certain crevices , cleft on the surface of the molecule which acts as active site and the functional groups attributed by the amino acids in that cleft take key role in binding as well as catalytic process .
The active site is usually located in a cleft or crevice .
Active site although present on the surface has its own three dimensional entity .
It has two distinct functions binding of the substrates and catalysis and both the functions are a result of the amino acid residues present there primarily and then the shape , which is brought about by the conformation .
The enzymes exhibit remarkable specificity because of their precise fit between their binding sites and their substrate .
Considering the active site it is a combination of two functional entities : one is the binding site , substrate binding site plus the catalytic site .
Enzyme protein , as some of you may be aware , has enough number of ligand binding sites .
Substrate binding sites are one of them .
The active site consists of the substrate binding site plus catalytic site .
It does not catalyze the reaction it will only remain as a ligand binding site .
Typical substrate binding energies range from 3 - 12 kcal mol - 1 .
That is the order of magnitude which the binding energy goes in the binding of the substrate .
Another feature is that not all the twenty amino acids that are present in protein are involved in active sites .
Just by observation of the variety of enzymes which have been studied so far , it is noted that only a few amino acids usually polar in nature they participate directly in catalysis - cystein , histidine , serine , aspartic acid , glutamic acid and lysine .
You can see that all of them are polar in nature and these are the usual amino acids which constitute the primary functional groups on the active sites .
In some cases the terminal carboxylic and amino groups are also involved whenever by tertiary folding they come in the proximity of the active site .
Not that on the terminal side if they are far away from active site they will play a role .
Once by folding process if they come and become a part of the active site , the amino and carboxylic groups are also important in the catalytic function but again they are also polar in nature .
By meaning that they participate directly in the catalysis I mean that they are present at the active site .
The involvement of certain amino acids at the active site is a result of the whole folding process in which all amino acids are involved .
So while we say that these are amino acids that are present on the active site and they participate in the catalysis does not mean that the other amino acids which are playing a role in the folding process have no relevance .
If one of the amino acids is transferred or removed the whole folding will change and primarily involved means those which are physically present on the active site .
But their presence in the active site may result from the whole composition of the protein as well as the folding process .
Another feature which we need to keep in mind is that certain enzymes require cofactors .
The precise reason for that is amino acid side chains cannot catalyze all the chemical reactions .
That is one of limitations although the protein design or the enzyme design has been so beautifully evolved that a large variety of reactions can be catalyzed but still there are limitations .
One of that is that the available twenty amino acids are not able to catalyze all the reactions .
The limitation is on the electron acceptors .
None of the amino acids are good electron acceptors and many reactions which are primarily based on electron acceptors require additional input in the form of cofactors .
For example the cofactors like NAD , NADP , they are all ideal electron acceptors and they participate in the catalytic process simply by oxidation , reduction or whatever mechanism is involved .
Therefore small organic molecules or even metal ions provide electron acceptor or some other chemical potentialities in addition to proteins for catalytic function .
So that is one limitation that while most of the reactions can be catalyzed by the amino acids present on the active site , certain reactions which are not possible to be catalyzed by this can be carried out by cofactors and that provides a key role for catalytic function .
Just to recall our earlier discussion on the previous day we mentioned that the energy of activation E * can be broken down into two components that is your enthalpy contribution as well as entropic contribution .
We can break down the reaction and the classical Arrhenius equation , the expression for rate constant can be written as k = RT / Nh exp ( ?
S * / R ) exp ( - ?
H * / RT ) The rate enhancement process consists of two different components or the energy of activation consists of enthalpic as well as entropic contribution .
So by any means if the enzyme can either reduce the enthalpic contribution to the free energy of activation or entropic contribution , the net result will be a catalytic function .
While considering the various ways we will consider the lowering of energy of activation through each of the contributions and first we will see lowering of energy of activation through entropic contributions .
Consider a bimolecular reaction in which A and B participate to from AB * as a transition state .
The entropy of these molecules will consist of translational as well as rotational degrees of freedom .
Three degrees of translational freedom and three rotational for each of the molecule A and B .
The two molecules will have six degrees of freedom .
Once the reactants A and B bind to an enzyme molecule at the active site there are only half of the their degree of freedom that means they become one entity and they lose six of their degrees of freedom and thereby there is a loss of rotational and translational entropy and the transition state will have only three degrees of rotational and three degrees of the translational freedom each .
You must understand that the net result of binding of the two reactants to the active site involves in reducing the degrees of freedom of the two reactant molecules and therefore there is a loss of entropy .
In the case of A and B acting in the absence of any catalyst , in our case we are considering enzyme as catalyst , when the transition state compound is formed there is a loss of entropy .
Now this loss of entropy is accounted for in the energy of activation .
Whereas in the case of enzymatic catalysis the loss of entropy as a result of combining into one entity is attributed in the binding process which are already taking place in the binding process .
When the enzyme substrate complex forms a transition state there is no loss of entropy affecting and the loss of entropy as a result of enzyme binding compensates for the reduction in the free energy of activation .
This binding energy can be of the order of about 10 - 15 kcalmol - 1 at 25ºc and if you take the two reactants at one molar concentration , the computation will tell that it will be about 10 - 15 kcalmol - 1 .
Simply by entropic contribution of binding the enzyme can reduce the energy of activation by about 10 - 15 kcalmol - 1 .
Just to repeat , we should consider two different cases .
In one case A and B are present in a solution in which there is no catalyst .
Ultimately for the reaction to take place they have to pass through a transition state .
This A and B both have to colloid and make an unstable compound .
It will lead to loss of entropy and this loss of entropy will then be accounted for in the energy of activation .
This loss of entropy has to be provided in terms of the energy of activation .
But when you talk about enzymatic catalysis this loss of entropy is compensated by binding process .
That means whatever loss of entropy is there in the binding process that is not to be provided in the energy of activation .
There will be loss of entropy but that will result in the range of energy during binding process .
Whereas from the bound enzyme substrate complex to go to the transition state there will be no loss of entropy and that entropy gain will account for advantage in the entropic contribution to the energy of activation and this is one of the major contribution in reduction and activation energy as a result of substrate binding .
One point must be kept in mind that such an advantage due to entropic contributions for the energy of activation will be more pronounced if they are multi substrate reactions .
If suppose there is a unimolecular reaction one may say that there is hardly any advantage .
There are hardly any unimolecular reactions as far as an enzyme is concerned expecting certain isomerases because most of the reactions are bi or trimolecular .
There are some , but not many in numbers .
In the case of unimolecular reactions this entropic contribution will not be very significant .
There will be another mechanism which will play a role .
The reduction in the activation energy is not through one mechanism .
There are various mechanisms and the net gain is sum total of the kind of mechanism that are involved in specific enzymes and in case of unimolecular reactions the entropic contribution may be quite insignificant .
The binding of the substrate to the enzyme molecule is not a process which is within the purview of activation or transition state .
The enzyme substrate complex must not be confused with a part in the transition state complex .
It is a totally different process which , particularly the enzyme substrate complex is a result of a large number of non covalent interactions between enzyme and substrate , hydrogen bonding or Vander Waal ’ s forces .
Whereas from the enzyme substrate complex to transition state is a totally different phenomenon and the energy required to go from an enzyme substrate complex to transition state is the amount of activation energy required for the reaction .
The binding energy is a totally different game and therefore that should not be confused .
Very often we might make a judgement that the energy which has gone into enzyme substrate binding is not a part of activation energy , is not required for catalytic process , for activation energy to be equalized .
This effect of entropic contribution to the energy of activation is called approximation effect or propinquity effect .
You bring the reactants into to a close box so that they act as one and they function .
As a result of this approximation one can also consider another feature .
When the substrates are bound on the active site the effective local concentration of the two reactants in the active site will also be much larger than the concentration in the free solution .
The substrate is now localized for the reaction at the active site whatever is the volume of active site in a given enzyme molecule .
This concentration of the reactant at the active site will be many fold higher compared to the actual concentration in the bulk phase in the aqueous medium in which the substrates are dissolved .
The higher concentration of the substrate at the active site means that the enzyme provides a new micro environment in which the substrate concentrations are much higher than in the bulk and you get the net effect of higher substrate concentration on the reaction rate .
Whatever mechanisms you can use to increase the frequency of collision , it could be the increase in reactant concentration , it could be temperature change , they will all result in increased reaction rate .
The net result of substrate binding to the active site which will lead by the approximation or propinquity effect into to a higher substrate concentration will also lead to an increased catalytic rate .
The approximation or propinquity effect will lead to benefit in the reaction rate , one by a reduction of energy of activation as a result of entropic contribution and the other is as a result of apparent higher concentration at the active site .
Here also the same situation will apply that these effects of approximation will not be very , very significant if you are talking about unimolecular reactions .
The other effect based on the entropic contributions is orientation effect .
While we discussed reaction rate theory we noted that collision of the molecule is a pre requisite for reaction to take place .
Not all the collisions result into product .
One of the reasons we considered was that the molecules have to posses a certain minimum energy , potential energy so as to reach to the level of energy of activation before they can break down into product from the unstable state .
Another reason of the non - release of product from collisions could be that the molecules during collisions may not be in the right orientation because orientation at the time of collision may also be significant in many cases and enzyme can play a key role .
Substrate binding to the enzyme site on the active site may also play an important role in providing the substrate molecule in the right orientation .
Orientation effect means the aligning of the substrate molecule on the enzyme active site in the right orientation which on collision will result into the product .
In higher frequency large numbers of total molecules that are present participate in the reaction process , a feature which will result in higher reaction rate .
The three dimensional confirmation of the active site takes care of that .
That means the evolving of the design of three dimensional structures to which this substrate molecule will fit will be exclusively specific for the orientation which is required for the catalytic reaction .
The orientation could be in the form of certain functional group on the substrate molecule , could also be the correct alignment of the electronic orbitals of the colliding molecules and a small departure from the optimum alignment may result in lower reaction rate or when we say lower reaction rate , increased energy of activation .
Theoretically this concept of orientation was considered that the enzyme is able to steer the reactants into a correct orbital alignment at the active site and therefore this effect was also called as orbital steering .
The two phenomena of orientation effect and orbital steering are related .
Orientation effect is a much broader term in the sense that it will include orbital steering as well as the aligning of certain functional groups on the substrate molecule but orbital steering is aligning of only electronic orbitals in a particular fashion at the site , which will result in the net catalytic function .
Mainly these two behaviors , approximation or orientation effects are the major contributing factors in all catalytic reactions catalyzed by enzyme molecules .
Another group of mechanisms that we will discuss are enthalpic factors .
If you consider the whole energy of activation , part of it is contributed by entropic modifications and part by enthalpic contributions .
If you just understand the enthalpic factors we must consider that the transition state is like a molecule with some of its chemical bonds in an unusually extended or strained form .
They are unstable molecules .
The bonds are partial bonds .
They are not completely formed .
Either they are quite weak bonds and either they are in process of forming or breaking somewhere in between .
That is what the transition state is .
Any mechanism by which you can take the reactant closer to a transition state not by formation of transition state any other mechanism which can do that will facilitate or reduce the energy of activation .
If you look into the mechanism of substrate binding to an enzyme active site something similar happens .
If during the binding process , the reactant or the substrate has to undergo some change in shape in order to fit very snugly into the active site there might be some distortion or strain on one of the bonds which is required to be broken .
All these factors will depend on the design of the active site which the nature has evolved in the evolutionary process .
None of these active sites have been designed so for at least for commercial purposes or for practical purposes .
There have been some academic efforts to take advantage of anti bodies to provide a catalytic function , to take advantage of stabilizing effect because antibodies have very high values of affinity to their substrate .
The antibodies and enzyme molecules in terms of their dissociation constant for their counter part in the case of enzymes it is substrate in case of anti bodies , they are antigens .
Their dissociation constant values are very , very small in the case of antigen antibody interaction .
If similar forces are involved they can also act as much better catalyst theoretically .
There have been efforts in which this has been successfully proven , of course in very specific cases .
Not a very general behavior .
Still we depend on the natural design on the enzyme active site for all practical purposes .
When you consider the strain or the distortion of the substrate molecule before it can go into the active site for binding purposes , if the desired bond which has to be broken during the reaction is partially strained or distorted then part of the job is already done .
Energy of activation required for conversion of enzyme substrate complex to the transition state will be smaller .
Consider simply a hypothetical case in which we have enzyme active site shown by this x , z ellipse .
A substrate molecule with a central carbon atom and a , b and c functional groups is present on this substrate molecule .
These are supposed to bind with x , y and z which are the amino acids residues on the active site .
We have considered that two of the functional groups on the substrate b and c are able to bind to y and z functional groups .
But one of them , a is not easily accessible to x in the in the native form of the reactant .
It has an attractive feature for binding purposes between a and x .
One of the mechanisms by which enzyme function is that the bond between the a and the central carbon atom gets distorted or strained , such that the binding gets facilitated to the x .
That means that this bond is already now partially broken and if this molecule then goes to transition state the energy of activation required will be much less .
In many cases such a thing happens and such a behavior is often called as modern rack hypothesis Today it is proven by many experimental designs that partial breakage of the bond can take place on the enzyme site but in earlier days people have thought of the concept that enzyme tears off the whole substrate molecule which has proven today by modern rack hypothesis and which illustrates that the enzyme can accommodate a substrate in which one of the bond which is required to be broken for catalytic reaction to take place can get distorted partially during the binding process thereby reducing the energy of activation .
If you consider even from energetic point of view let us say the binding process of these three residues requires 5 kcalmol - 1 for example and in the distortion process let us say already 2 kcal have been spent hypothetically .
So for this binding of a to x only three are required .
Instead 15 kcalmol - 1 involved in binding of the normal molecule for the three bonds , you will require only thirteen .
Therefore while going for the activated state , 2 kcal are already saved as a result of partial distortion and that is another mechanism what we call as modern rack hypothesis .
That is the component of the x y and z , are all on the active sites .
Here if you consider x y and z are the three residues which are the part of the active site which will bind to a , b and c functional group on the substrate .
Two of them are complementary and can easily bind without any problem .
One of them is out of the way and requires some distortion .
Enthalpic contribution might reduce energy by 2 kcals .
The energy required for transferring the enzyme substrate complex to activated state will be reduced by 2 kcals because 2 kcals have already been consumed in the distortion process at the binding site .
The binding energy should be distinguished from the energy of activation .
Energy of activation is energy required for the catalytic part .
Binding part whatever is consumed is different and that doesn ’ t account for because we are talking only one phenomenon , the increase in the catalytic rate and that takes place as a result of decrease in activation energy .
The other mechanism by which the enthalpic factors contribute to reducing energy of activation is general acid base catalysis .
This is the mechanism which is very often employed even in the case of chemical catalyst .
Many of the reactions can be catalyzed simply by acids or alkalis and the basic mechanism is that by certain transfer of electrons or protons to the reactants the catalyst can reduce the energy of activation .
The basic principle of acid base catalysis is more or less identical .
Only difference is that the role of acids or alkali in the chemical catalysis is played by the functional groups on the active sites .
This is based on the appropriate positioning of the catalytic functional groups within the active site of the enzyme .
Such groups are able to donate or accept electrons or protons to or from the substrate in such a way that it weakens its reacting bonds before the reaction process actually begins .
Again a similar theory just like in the case of the modern rack hypothesis we assumed that the binding process induces distortion on the reaction bond .
In the case here by the participation of the functional groups or the acids or basis we are weakening the bonds which are involved in catalysis .
Therefore the energy of activation will be reduced by that amount .
By providing acid or base groups at the active site an enzyme is able to stabilize the charge transition state .
It is quite logical that in such cases it will be mostly the ionic species like glycine or glutamic acid or proteic acid will be the functional group that will be responsible for acid base catalysis .
A very typical example in which acid base catalysis is predominantly found is the action of lysozyme .
Lysozyme is an enzyme which breaks down bacterial polysaccharide by virtue of acid base catalysis predominantly .
Positioning of the functional residues at appropriate positions so that it weakens certain bonds can also be considered covalent catalysis .
The difference is that in the case of acid base catalysis there is no covalent bond formation .
It is only transfer of electrons or protons to or from the substrate .
In the case of covalent catalysis transient covalent bonds are formed between the substrate and the enzyme or the coenzyme .
Amino acids residues participating in such reactions are serine , cysteine , histidine , lysine , aspartic acid and glutamic acid .
They participate by forming transient covalent bond .
That means the enzyme substrate complex which results as a result of these covalent bonds are highly reactive .
They have a covalent bond .
Bond energy is not that high and therefore even under ambient conditions by attack of another molecule they can further be broken down to the resulting products .
These side chains react by donating a pair of electrons to a centre of partial positive charge on the substrate molecule , a nucleophilic attack .
These pair of electrons looking for a positively charged nucleus donates a pair of electrons to form the desired bond .
The resulting highly reacting enzyme substrate complex is then attacked by water in the normal cases if it is a hydrolytic reaction .
Like in the case of lipase or protease , water can be the second substrate or it could be the second substrate itself to yield the desired product .
Again an example of such catalysis is cleavage of poly peptides by carboxy peptides .
In some of the examples in this table you will notice that on the first column you have side chain serine , cysteine , histidine , lysine , aspartic acid and glutamic acid .
The enzyme containing serine residue or hydroxyl group on the active site attacks at the positively charged nucleus , the central carbon atom and there by produces an enzyme substrate complex by nucleophilic attack and the type of bond formed is ester type of bond .
This is quite a highly reactive molecule .
That means not a very stable molecule as a covalent compound and therefore when it comes in contact with water it breaks down into the respective acid or alchol .
But on the carboxylic group this serine functional group of side chain of the active site can attack .
Similarly in the case of cysteine the type of bond formed is thioester .
In the case of histidine the bond formed is acylimidazole ; lysine forms Schiff ’ s base and aspartic and glutamic acid form anhydride bonds and these anhydride bonds then can be attacked by the second substrate .
Second substrate could be even water and thereby they will break down .
In fact a large number of hydrolytic enzymes follow such a behavior including proteases , particularly … .
proteases and lipases or tannase or for that matter n number of other hydrolytic enzymes follow the covalent bond formation .
These are some of the major mechanisms by which enzymes reduce the energy of activation .
There are some minor mechanisms also and among the minor mechanisms one is environmental or dielectric effect .
The earlier mechanisms that I mentioned were more or less general in nature .
Most of the enzymes involved in those mechanisms reduced the activation energy .
But the mechanism like environmental effect is provided by very specific enzymes only .
A not very frequently encountered effect for reducing the energy of activation is attributed to environmental effects .
Some reactions occur better in organic solvent which have low dielectric constant compared to water and this may be due to the fact that some of the attractive repulsive forces between the electric charges are much weaker in the medium of high dielectric constant that is water than in those with lower dielectric constant .
Such reactions are normally likely to occur more efficiently in the hydrophobic active sites on the enzyme surface as it can shield them from the aqueous phase .
Therefore in such cases enzymes provide a kind of organic or highly micro environment within the aqueous bulk environment .
A situation something like that of micelle in which the substrate can be shielded from the bulk aqueous phase and still the hydrophobic environment can be provided to the substrate .
It is not a micelle .
This is something analogous to micelle .
Substrate is not entering here .
The active site is predominantly hydrophobic in nature .
It predominantly consists of some hydrophobic active sites , all the residues whereby the micro environment provided for the reaction is hydrophobic and really it is away from the bulk aqueous environment of the enzyme .
To summarize whatever we have discussed today , the mechanism where by enzymes lower the free energy of activation for a reaction they catalyze can be grouped under following major heads : Propinquity or approximation , orientation effect so that they are built into a proper orientation either through aligning some of the functional groups or by orbital steering , then strain or distortion effect on the bond which is desired to be broken during the reaction or strategic positioning of reactive functional groups in the active site .
This is primarily based on the acid base catalysis or covalent catalysis , a feature which is common to that of chemical catalysis .
A combination of all these effects underlies all enzymatic catalysis .
No enzyme follows a single mechanism .
They all follow a combination of these mechanisms and the contributions made by each of these mechanisms will vary from enzyme to enzyme and if more than one mechanism is employed to reduce the energy of activation , the enzyme will be able to perform better catalysis in a more efficient way .
So we will stop at this point today .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
And , in this lecture , we will discuss about polymer additives .
We will talk about chemistry of polymer additives , and we will give examples of polymer degradation , and how the stabilization is done using externally added additives .
We will talk about anti - oxidants and how they are , how they function in a polymer metrics .
We will talk about light stabilizer , and then flame retardants .
Now , let us first understand , why we need to add additives in polymers ?
Why should we care at all ?
Now , if you look at the production of thermoplastics alone , they are over 120 million metric tons .
Now , out of this entire volume , 95 percent and more would have been useless without stabilization by adding external additives .
For examples , this pure polyolefins like polyethylenes , polypropylenes , they oxidize very rapidly .
So , basically drawing them is very difficult , unless they are stabilized by adding external additives .
Pure PVC cannot be extruded and molded in the higher temperature , their processing temperature without degradations .
So , if you , if you do not add additives for stabilization , then the polyvinyl chloride , we get out of ; the molded part will have very poor mechanical properties , which is , which are not useful for particle applications .
So , we require stabilization to have this polymers apply , applicable in the applications , where they are currently used .
So , the application , the successful application of polymeric materials is substantially attributable to the incorporation of the additives into the virgin resin , we just produced from the reactor .
Unless , if you do not use the additives in those resins which are coming out of the reactor , they are , will come down drastically .
What does additives do ?
Additives enable the polymers to overcome the processing difficulties ; for example , the polyvinyl chloride , we just mentioned ; it also help in overcoming some performance limitations , and it also protect , give the protection in a polymer from the environment .
We discussed about the weathering condition with ability , where polymer exports are experienced heavy light and other parameters .
So , if we stabilize the polymer , keeping those application in mind , then the applicability will go up .
So , basically , by using additives we can enhance or we can overcome the limited environmental stability of the polymers .
Now , how do you choose polymers , which polymer , sorry , additives for a particular polymers ?
Now , the nature of the additives we must use or we use , must be depended on several parameter ; for example , composition on the polymer .
The additives must be chosen , keeping in mind the chemical composition of polymer ; their additive must be comparable ; in the sense , that it should not react with the , with the polymer itself or it should not make harm to the polymer itself , which will deteriorate the polymer property .
Processing condition ; now , we must know the processing condition of the polymer for which we want to use the additive ; now , that will that will give the temperature of use and the amount of share .
So , the additives , which we are using , or you planned to use must survive those conditions themselves .
So , if we use some additives , which do not survive the condition of the processing of the polymer , which you are interested .
Then , obviously , the additives will not function after the molded part or the final part is made .
And , obvious ; and also , the interaction between the additives and polymer might be different at that higher condition , higher temperature and higher share rate .
So , those things has to be kept in mind .
Obviously , the target application has to be kept in mind , which , for which application we want to use that additive .
And , we must remember , if you are talking about the stabilizations specifically , you must remember the mechanism by which the polymers are degraded , when subject to heat , light , shear , moisture , either during the processing or during the manufacturer , and during its life cycle .
So , basically , if you want to stabilize or if you want to have a polymer made with the help of , with addition of additives , and we must know the mechanism by which the properties of the polymer deteriorates with the , in presence of light , heat , shear , during the processing or during the use of the polymers in actual application .
Normal chain growth polymers like polyolefins or polystyrene , polyvinyl chloride , they have these carbon hydrogen bond , carbon chloride bonds ; these bonds are very prone to degradation by a variety of environmental agents .
So , we ; so , these are the polymer generally require protection against oxidation , light , and protection again against a UV light and thermal degradation , etcetera .
So , these are example about the chemical structure .
We need to keep in mind , the chemical structure of the polymer when you design a additive .
Step growth polymers , generally do not have these bonds which are very prone for degradation , but they do have the functional groups which are prone to hydrolysis , like this ester groups , amide groups , or carbonate groups .
They are , these groups typically hydrolyze very easily , and specially in presence of impurities , metal impurities , and acids and brushes .
So , this polymers actually undergo molecular degradation in process , presence of moisture .
And , these hydrolysis , such hydrolysis is favored during high temperature processing .
And these are accelerated by , this hydrolysis is accelerated by the presence of residual catalyst .
So , you must have , this you keep in mind , when you design additives for step growth polymers .
And , additives are also added to import new and enhanced properties like , in the polymer like , fire resistants , static dissipation , improvement in mechanical properties , to compatibilize blends and so on .
So , there are many more examples , where the property of the polymers are enhanced by use of adding external additives .
And , typically in a polymer formulation , more than one additives are used .
And , so , a understanding of the mutual interaction between this additives are essential for making an optimal formulations .
And , generally , this small organic additives , they worked by sacrifices , sacrificial mechanism ; by meaning , by terms sacrificial mechanism meaning , that they do destroy themselves and protect the polymer , the main polymer which you want to maintain or retain .
So , basically they destroy them self by doing some chemical reaction , and sacrifice them self to protect the main polymer in concern .
So , that , they , we can classify the polymers in several ways .
And , we can , for example , we can classify them as a protective , protective additives ; which , they are the additives which prevent , or delay , or in or influence , the ageing process or degradation process in the polymers .
And , some of the additives used are antioxidants , which basically prevent against oxidation ; heat stabilizer , which prevents degradation of polymer under heat ; light stabilizer , which basically protect the polymer from UV radiation .
Anti microbials , which protect polymer from microbes , bacterias , and so on ; metal deactivators , which basically deactivate the catalyst residues or metallic impurities residues , which basically help in , or which basically degrades the polymer , during its use or in processing time .
Structure modifier : the additives which modify or influence the molecular or super molecular structures , like compatibilizer , they help in making compatibilized blend ; cross linking agents , which obviously , introduced or added to bring cross linking between polymer chains ; nucleating agents , they basically added to increasing , increase the crystanality ; dispersing agents which are used for dispersing some fillers in the polymer metrics ; foaming and defoaming agents , which are added to make foamed polymer product .
There are additives , which are used in polymer formulations , which basically assist in processing and fabrication , or in assembly , like lubricants , mold release agents which basically help in reducing the mold from after the brat is formed processing head , adhesion promoters , scavenger and acid neutralizer , catalyst quenchers ; they are some other examples , general examples of this type of additives .
As I said earlier , that there are numerous , numeron additives are added to increase the property , or they enhance the properties of polymers .
And , there , there could be list of many such additives ; for example , flame retardants which help in reducing the flame flame ability of the polymers , impact modifier , antistatic agents , antiblocking agents , anti fogging agents , optical brighteners , pigment and colorants , coupling agent , plasticizers , reinforcements , so many things can be added to enhance the property .
And obviously , you cannot add all these for every polymer .
And , it depends upon the final applications ; if your applications required a flame , a polymer which is flame resistant , then you must add a flame retardant to it .
And , if you are making a polymers , which will be like a packing film for food trapping application ; then if you , if he is having anti fogging additives , then it will prevent fogging a condensation of the water moister in the packing film , which will basically allow the customers to look through that film .
If the anti fogging agents , so , additives were not present , it will condense , and the customers could not be able to look through that film ; so , that will basically be a bad property of the film .
Now , before we discuss ; in the chemistry , there are some issues about the additives we must consider is , how do they function , the mechanism ; obviously , chemistry plays a major role in this .
And , cost , though the amount of additives are added in small quantity , but typically they are much costlier than the base resin .
So , basically , one must remember or must consider the cost of the additives used .
Even though the amount of the additives used are less , but because of their higher cost compared to the base resin , the cost of the polymer formulation would be higher .
So , the cost for the particular application must be kept in someone , in mind of the , in mind of the manufactural .
Proper amount of loading : sometimes this additives function for a particular level of loading ; too less loading or might not be bring about the advantage which are the manufacturer looking for ; and too much of addition of the additive might destroy the polymer itself , and obviously , the cost of the formulation will go up .
So , the optimum loading of the additives is what required .
And , you must know the interaction of the additives with the plastics ; what is the , how they interact with plastics , interacts with other additives ; as I said , the multiple additives are used ; same times interaction with other additives are also be important .
And . long term issues : like , how they function , there long term longevity , and they are effect in the environment ; they must , this should be considered ; for example , if you are using some the packaging film for food application , then the additives should not leak out and contaminate the food .
For example , if you are adding some additives for some medical application , then the additives should not come out and contaminate the medical devices .
So , so that should be considered before the polymer is used .
How it is handling ?
Handling of the additives also concerned .
For example , liquid additives are normally difficult to handle .
If you are using a polymer powder , and if you want to add liquid , the dispersing , dispersion of the additives in the polymer powder is difficult .
So , how , you must know , how you will handle the additives which you are going to add in the formulation , and how you are going to mix it with the plastics , that is important .
Let us take an example about polymer degradation .
We are discussing that polymer might degrade in presence of UV light , or in presence heat or light .
Now , let us talk about one of the common example of polymer degradation and the stabilization ; and let us take example of polyvinyl chloride degradation .
Now , these are the ; this is , as you know , this is the structure of polyvinyl chloride , but along with the main chain , there could be some other units in the polymer back bone .
They are , the number is very less ; it is given 4 , 4 to 6 out of 1000 repeat units , 0.2 to 1.6 out of 1000 repeat units .
So , basically , these , this irregularities are very less in the polymer chain , but the degradation is mainly caused by this irregularities itself , not the main polymer chain .
So , the unsaturation and the tarcaric chlorines are very bad for thermal stability , for polyvinyl fluoride .
And , these unstauration or the terminal chloride , terminal chlorine , resins of terminal chlorine arises due to the chain transfer reaction during polymerization .
And , it is very difficult to avoid these reactions .
And , these sides serve as chlorine radical source , which basically initiate the degradation .
So , the main degradation happened by dehydrochlorination as shown in this figures .
The main degradation of polyvinyl chloride happened due to the dehydrochlorination at higher temperature , and that starts with chlorine radical .
And , if you have these consecution over 5 , 5 carbon atom or 5 double bonds basically , then it will produce colour .
And , these degradation is accelerated by , in presence of light , heat , oxygen and presence of acids .
And , colour may form , also from these protonated polyenes as it is shown in this figure .
So , basically , if you want to stabilize polyvinyl chloride , you basically want to have a mechanism by which you can trap chloride chlorine radical , or you can destroy this allophonic or arylic double bonds which is producing , getting produced during the degradation process .
So , how the stabilization is done ?
One example , there are many , many additives can be used ; one additives , one type of additives are shown here .
They convert these unstable arylic , allyl chlorides to non allic , non allyl sites ; and example dibutyl tin disulfides , and their chemical reaction with the allylic double bond is shown here .
So , they form this arylic , allyl chloride to non allylic sites and prevent degradation .
And , there are additives like dibutyl tin maleate , which basically break up the conjugated double bond , and prevent the degradation further .
The other additives used for PVC stabilizations , like soaps of cadmium , zinc , barium salts ; and , they act as acid scavengers .
Lead salts also act as acid scavenger ; and , they , basically are one of the major additives used in PVC industry .
So , this is one example , we just discussed about PVC .
And , PVC is a very prone to degradation under processing .
So , this one example ; is a very good example to discuss about polymer degradation and stabilization .
Now , let us talk about one more class of additives - anti oxidants .
The anti oxidants basically retard the oxidative degradation process of polymers , which is initiated , the oxidative degradation is initiated , when free radicals are created in the polymer material by , either heat , UV , mechanical shear , or metallic impurities .
So , anti oxidants basically retard the oxidative degradation process .
Now , to know the anti oxidant additives which are used , let us discuss the basic autoxidation scheme for a minute .
So , let us go through and look this basic .
The first step is basically initiation .
So , you have a initiator forming a initiator radical which might abstract hydrogen from polymer backbone , forming a radical in the backbone .
Now , these R , R dot can be produced by the hemolytic cleavage of this C H type bonds , in presence of heat from the polymer itself .
Next , normally the propagation happen ; propagation step , where it reacts with oxygen forming peroxide radical ; and , this radical start the further chain reaction , forming further radical .
Termination of this chain might happen by reaction between the radicals ; basically , reaction between 2 radicals .
Now , if there are , if R has an alpha hydrogen ; if R has an alpha hydrogen , it can further form epitomic type moiety .
So , this happens , this reaction only happen , that R has alpha hydrogen .
The others , other secondary and branching reaction can also happen ; secondary and branching reactions , hydro peroxide can give other radical ; if R is tertiary , tertiary , if R has alpha hydrogen .
So , these are the basic auto oxidation mechanism by which oxidative degradation might happen .
It is , as you can see , it is a radical process ; now , to prevent these ; so , if you want to design an anti oxidant , you basically have to attack or stop all this processes .
Now , anti oxidants are added or designed , which cannot attack or prevent all these steps , but it might prevent some step in between .
So , one thing can be possible ; if you want to use or stop these auto oxidation , you might reduce the concentration of the I radical or the R dot ; you can reduce the concentration of I dot or R R radical ; now , that is basically out of our hand , because the processing and the other external conditions we cannot control .
So , what we can do ?
We can trap this R dot ; or , say , peroxide radical , and that is done by primary anti oxidant .
So , primary anti oxidant , basically trap this R dot and peroxy radicals .
We can increase the rate of termination reaction ; and , that is done by addition of hindered amines .
Now , we can also do , and decompose the ; first stop this step ; we can decompose these by non radical pathways .
And , this is typically done by use of secondary anti oxidants .
So , basically , we know , what are the step in oxidation process or to oxidation processes ?
Normally , inefficient propagation termination and secondary and branching reactions .
And , to prevent that , what are the things we might do or it is typically done ?
You can always reduce the radical concentration , but it is not in our hand .
So , we can add the additives which can trap this radical R dot or proxy radicals , which is done by adding primary anti oxidant ; we can increase the rate of termination reaction , which is done by adding hinder diamine .
Or , we can decompose this hydro , hydro peroxides by non radical path ways .
And , that is done by adding secondary anti oxidant .
Example of these primary anti oxidants , hinder diamines and secondary anti oxidants , and how they do this trapping or decomposition or increase in the rate of termination , we will discuss briefly now .
So , primary anti oxidant , as you said , as I just mentioned , it traps this R dot and proxy radicals .
And , there are several types of anti , primary anti oxidants : one is hindered phenols ; they basically terminate the proxy radicals , as I just mentioned .
And , they themself are non discolouring , but they can form chromophoric structures , after they , to this hydroxyl , a proxy radical trapping .
One example , the common example is BHT , butyl hydroxotolovine ; structure is shown here ; they are used in this type of anti , primary anti oxidants are used very much for styrenics , vinyls , and elastomers .
But , the drawback for these primary anti oxidants , that they form a very volatile low molecular rate phenolics .
So , they might get lost during the processing conditions .
So , these are the mechanism by which they work .
For example , these are additives , trap this radical , form a radical by themselves , which can rearrange , and react with the other radicals , and form non radical species .
And , these final species like stilbene quinine , benzo quinone , they basically are sometimes colour bodies .
So , then this additives themself is not , or they would not decolour the polymer , but final compounds , when they form after stabilization , that could generate colour in the polymer matrix , that is the one drawback .
And , one each radical , basically capture 2 , 3 radicals , and by which they basically prevent these oxidation process .
Some other mechanism continuing in the , from the last page , how this type of butane hydroxyl tolovines capture or trap the radicals are shown here .
So , basically , they capture or trap the radical produced ; and , by doing this , they basically reduce the oxidation process ; and , the only drawback is that they sometimes form a coloured compound , in doing that .
These are some examples .
There are many many phenolic anti oxidants available in the market .
These are some example shown here .
They are this phenolic anti oxidants .
And one thing , it can be noted , not only for this anti oxidant , for all other additives as well that , it is not always a , that all this additives will work for a particular polymer or all polymers .
So , basically there is some trial , and experiments one need to do , to find out the best possible additives for the polymer you are looking for .
So , there are some experiments must be done , looking at the mechanism by which the stabilization or the additives ; what function you are adding the additives for , that is done .
The aromatic amine antioxidants in the diamines , which basically , as we said , increase the rate of termination reactions .
So , they are amine , secondary arylamines function by hydrogen donation , and they act has chain terminators of peroxide decomposition , decomposer .
The drawback is that they might , it is produced colour bodies , and that will discolour the polymer matrixs .
But , these are the some examples , I am keeping on ; there could be many many more examples of this type of additives , but this is just for your knowledge that these are the possible way of using additives , and how they actually do their job ; for example , primary anti oxidants by trapping the radicals , and these by increasing the termination reaction .
Secondary anti oxidants , they are hydro peroxide decomposers ; react with hydro peroxides and produce non radical products .
And , examples are like trivalent phosphorous , divalent sulfur compound , containing compounds , phosphites , thioesters , these are the common examples of secondary anti oxidants .
For example , how they work phosphites ; they basically decompose these hydro peroxides , and form non radical products , and thereby decreasing the concentration , decrease the concentration of hydro peroxide .
Hence , decrease the auto oxidation process .
Some commercial phosphite anti oxidants are shown here .
Again , there are many more ; and , there is no buyers for these anti oxidants , from my point .
These are just examples arbitrarily chosen from the literature .
Now , we mentioned , I mentioned that the step growth polymers are , have those functional groups , like esters , carbonates , or amides .
They are proven to hydrolyze .
For example , this PET is shown here ; polyethylene terephthalate polyester , they can react with water and hydrolyze .
And , hydrolysis process , basically reduce the chain length .
And , once the chain length is reduced , molecular rate goes down , and the properties of the polymer also go down .
And , this happens , as I mentioned this , for linear polyesters , polyamides , polyurethanes , polyureas , polycarbonates , where their functional groups have , groups which are prone to hydrolyze .
And , they catalyst by presence of acids or basis we know organic chemistry that hydrolyzes is catalyst by the presence of acid and basis , and vinyl polymers do not usually undergo this type of hydrolysis .
And , these are the one example of the hydrolysis happening during the processing condition at higher temperature , at higher shear rate .
This is for a polyethylene terephalate , which has been dried for 100 degree centigrade at 20 hours ; that means , the moisture content in this polyethylene terephalate sample is very less .
So , during processing , the hydroxylation , the hydrolysis is less , so the molecular drop .
Hence , the viscosity drop is less .
Whereas , if , is take a undried PET , which have significant amount of moisture in the sample , then it actually hydrolysis very soon in that high temperature and high shear condition , during processing as a freezen molecular weight drops , and viscosity of the sample also drops .
Let us talk about , next , light stabilizer .
Light stabilizers are added as additive to eliminate or reduce the reactions in the polymers caused by visible or UV light radiation .
The most engineering plastics or hypo of polymers , they contain aromatic groups , which intensely absorb UV light around 290 nano meter ; and , this is most susceptible light in , this wave length corresponds to 95 kilo calorie per Einstein energy ; and , that can break most of the chemical bonds .
So , basically , absorption of UV light is basically determinant for the polymer molecules .
And , once the bond cleavage starts , you can get lots of chemical bodies forming , which absorb the UV , visible near , UV visible range forming yellow colour of the polymer .
So , you can use 2 types of , 2 or 3 types of UV stabilizers .
One , UV is UV absorbers which basically absorb and effectively screen the UV light from interactive with bulk of the polymer matrices .
Other types of UV stabilizer , hindered amine light stabilizer HALS , which basically arrest the chemical chain reaction resulting from the free radical , which basically are free radicals scavengers .
And , this 2 can be added together , sometimes to have a synergistic benefit for engineering plastics .
Let us take example of photodegradation of one polymer .
In this case , we , let us talk about polystyrene .
So , with the exposer to UV light , it turns yellow ; as a result of that , bond cleavage will be high energy UV light ; and , as the result , the polymer becomes embrittle .
And , this degradation of molecular happens faster in outdoor conditions , because it has exposed to the UV light , much more extent than indoor conditions .
In case of polystyrene , as we said , that it is the presence of aromatic groups which basically responsible for absorption of UV light , and that actually causes ring oxidation and which can basically initiate the polymer degradation process , as shown in this figure .
And , they finally , they can form this , which is responsible for the yellowing of the polymer material .
And , another example of photodegradation of polycarbonate ; if you take BPA polycarbonate and keep it outside , for 1 to 1 and a half hours , it turns yellow and becomes hazy and brittle of that time .
And , there 2 path ways by which BPA poly carbonate , discriminate polycarbonate undergo photooxidation .
This 2 path is shown here .
There could be rearrangement , molecular rearrangement due to absorption of UV light ; or , it could be , in this case it could be due to photo oxidation product , and these basically produced highly coloured product .
So , the polymer matrix becomes yellow , and this process also , the polymer property polymer molecular drops , and the property of the polymers become significantly lower compared to what it was originally after the molding .
So , light stabilizer must ; basically we talked about 2 types of light stabilizer - one , which can absorb the UV light and protect the bulk of the polymer from UV light ; and second we talked about HALS , which basically prevent the oxidation process or the radical process , and prevent the molecular weight degradation .
And , these are the some examples of organic light stabilizers .
Again , there are many stabilizers available in the market .
I just took few examples .
And , their UV visible spectrise zone , as you can see , from the absorbance , they actually absorb heavily in the UV range , because they absorb ; they actually prevent the bulk of the polymer from getting exposed to the UV condition .
Now , the mechanism of these absorption , UV absorption happens that , they basically absorb , and then at excited state , protons transfer happen ; and finally , they form a new excited state , which , from which they , by radiation less process they come back to the new ground state .
So , this is example of that photo stabilizer in normal ground state ; and , with absorption of UV light they go to a first exited state , where a proton transfer happen ; and , finally , a radiation less process bring them back to a new ground state .
So , by this mechanism , this is the mechanism by which this organic light stabilizers function as a photo stabilizer .
There could be inorganic lights stabilizer or photo stabilizer as well , for example , carbon blacks ; and , they have particle size from 20 to 40 nano meters ; and , they are very effective absorber ; but , obviously , they can be , all be used in samples , which are meant to be black .
Titanium oxides , it is another UV absorber , which absorbs highly below 370 nano meter .
Another example could be zinc oxide and iron oxide based , some other pigments also can be used .
But , these are not ; this is the normanic life steps ; there are though , they protect from UV light , but they have some other problems which basically prevent their use in practical applications .
So , these are the inorganic light stabilizer ; they do not get used very frequently in applications , in real applications .
The other stabilizers , like hindered amine light stabilizers , we just talked about , which basically prevent the radical process .
So , basically , trap the radicals and form non radical process , and by which they prevent degradation of molecular weight , and formation of the yellow colour bodies .
And , some of the commercially available hindered amine light stabilizer results are shown here .
These are the again represented in examples of some light stabilizers , commonly used in polymers .
Now , what we will do ?
I will finish of , for this lecture at this moment .
And what we will do ?
I will , in the next lecture , which we will be going to be the last lecture of this course .
We will talk about the other types of additives , like this fire retardants , how they work ?
What is there mechanism and surface migrating of additives ?
And , we will talk about polymer blends , little bit briefly ; and then , go to the concluding remarks for the course .
So , let us stop here for this lecture , and we will complete the course in next lecture .
So far we have discussed various facets of enzymes starting from the chemical and functional nature of the enzymes , reaction kinetics , methods of immobilization of enzymes followed by the design and analysis of immobilized enzyme reactors merely from the point of view of their application in process industries and today we will take some examples of these applications particularly in process industries .
That means the use of immobilized enzymes as industrial biocatalyst in the industries .
Well I will try to illustrate with a couple of examples which will give you an idea as to why we have been looking at the use of immobilized enzyme compared to either soluble enzyme or chemical catalyst .
You will also appreciate that the use of enzymes particularly for an industrial application are often limited to the sections that are listed here .
A major application sector is industrial catalysis whereby we replace a chemical catalyst for carrying out a chemical transformation to produce a desired product .
Typical examples are hydrolysis of starch , hydrolysis of penicillin to produce six amino penicillanic acid .
Incidentally bulk of the applications are in the field of hydrolysis that means hydrolytic reactions .
Although there are examples where other groups of enzymes have been used in an immobilized form for carrying out industrial processing their large scale applications have been so far limited .
Bulk of the commercial application have been in the area of hydrolytic enzymes with the exception of glucose isomerase which is in the isomerase category .
The other group of application sector is analytical applications .
Enzymes here have a very important role to play because of their specificity and many of the analytical situations which are enormously difficult in the case of chemical analysis can be handled very accurately and dependably by use of enzymes and to economize the operation of the analysis , the role of immobilized enzymes becomes more important .
The immobilized enzymes will also find use in sensors that means the electrodes if you want to have an analytical tool in the form of an online sensor in that case one looks for the immobilized enzyme preparations which can detect a particular product of interest .
Then another area where probably cost or the process of economics is not important is the medical or therapeutic applications where the effectiveness is a very important aspect and in many cases even immobilized enzymes have found way in medical or therapeutic applications .
The typical examples are the urease waste kidney that means dialysis unit , where dialysis units have been modified to include immobilized urease to facilitate the dialysis for patients who are suffering from kidney failure .
The other one is on the use of aspergillus for leukemia patients .
Another application sector is bioseparations ; the typical example is affinity separation which is based on the covalent coupling of one of the ligand for effecting the separation process .
A very specific method is applicable either for very high value products or where the number of stages required are very large , they can be minimized to a small number .
You have a whole range of small applications in different sectors probably the most prominent among the miscellaneous groups I will like to place is biological …… treatment .
Many of the specific systems require intervention of enzymatic catalysis for safe disposal of the waste emerging from a particular industry .
There might be very small applications here and there where immobilized enzymes might find useful applications .
Today we will be looking at the first application sector where they are used mainly as industrial catalyst .
For their use as a industrial catalyst the important factors which have to be kept in mind are the yield of enzyme from native source ; the original enzyme itself has to be chosen which is desirable for any industrial process both interms of operational characteristics as well as the effect of other impurity or other conditions which prevail in the feed stream .
They must be able to tolerate it and the enzyme must be available when you say yield I am referring to a term which incorporates the cost part ; because higher the yield , the cost can be lower .
Then the second factor is cost of carrier and reagents for immobilization .
The immobilization method , the carrier and the reagents required for immobilization is another factor which contributes significantly to the suitability of the use of an immobilized enzyme preparations for industrial processing .
Then activity of immobilized biocatalyst , the final activity which has to be used for catalysis and operational stability of immobilized biocatalyst , the factor which determines the whole process economics .
Finally regenerability of the carrier is a factor you will notice in one of the examples which I have given today that although the carrier is very expensive the cost factor here as we have mentioned may be high but if it is regenerable the cost can be taken care and does not contribute very significantly to the overall cost of the process .
So regenerability can be a very , very positive feature and in most cases that has been the key factor .
If you look at variety of industrial processing that go in processing of foods , animal feeds those industrial factors which use primarily natural products as the feed stocks our enzymes are going to play a major role in those industries where the feed stock or raw materials are from natural source .
That means the contents , carbohydrates , lipids and proteins or some other biomolecules which are often attackable by the enzyme molecules .
Some of the factors which in addition to the earlier components of an immobilized enzyme process which have emerged by virtue of experience in various processes are also like this .
For example if you consider the enzyme and the three factors the cost , reuse and stability then the immobilized enzyme systems are very , very suitable for high cost enzymes ; the cost of the enzyme is very high .
In the case of enzymes with low cost even the batch system soluble enzyme may be suitable .
An enzyme like alpha amylase is one of the example for low cost enzymes and is used in soluble form in batch reactor because you can afford to discard it ; you need not recover it whereas high value enzymes are most suitable to be used in immobilized form and here when I say column system I am covering both either by packed bed or even it could be depending on the process a CSTR also ; but here the column gives only column .
The reaction control in the case of soluble enzyme and the batch immobilized enzyme is usually difficult which makes it very easy in the case of a continuous flow immobilized enzyme reactor .
The control of the enzyme reactors is rather difficult in the case of soluble enzyme batch processes or even immobilized enzyme batch processes and the control is much more effective in the case of a continuous flow reactor using immobilized enzyme .
The product purity also has a role to play in decision making of the use of immobilized enzyme otherwise product purity can be very high in the case of a immobilized enzyme used in continuous reactors because there is no contamination from the enzyme protein .
Some of the side reactions are likely to take place in the case of the continuous reactors and the residence times are usually lesser than the soluble enzymes or the batch reactors because the advantage of the smaller residence time in the continuous reactor as well as the absence of any contamination from the enzyme protein provides you a product which is much more pure compared to soluble enzymes or an immobilized enzyme in the batch systems .
The equipment part is slightly unfavorable in the sense that in the case of continuous flow immobilized enzyme reactor the initial capital investment or equipment may be comparatively higher compared to a batch soluble process or a batch immobilized process .
The same thing applies to automation .
In the case of batch processes there is no automation whereas continuous processes can be automated and which can make a lot of saving in the labor cost and running cost that means the labor cost are related by per unit weight of volume of the product are relatively low in the case of continuous reactor systems using immobilized enzyme and the processes with immobilized system can be easily scaled up compared to the batch processes which might find variations from batch to batch .
These are the various parameters like the enzyme itself , the reaction , product , equipment , running cost and advantage of scale and one has to analyze a given process on the basis of these parameters and then take a decision whether it is desirable to go for a soluble enzyme batch system , immobilized enzyme batch system or immobilized enzyme continuous system .
The first example that I want to illustrate with the use of immobilized enzyme is the production of L amino acids by immobilized amino acylase .
This example probably was the first commercial process used anywhere in the world using immobilized enzymes .
The same process was used in Japan using a soluble batch enzyme over a period of about ten years and they were producing L amino acids by using the amino acylase soluble enzyme produced from the microbial resources but in those soluble enzyme batch processes , the problem of purification was very , very severe .
That means usually the product stream after the batch processes will be contaminated with an enzyme .
It has to be removed because these L amino acids which were produced were useful either for food applications or animal feed or sometime pharmaceuticals and therefore you cannot leave unconverted or unused proteins in the feed stream and the number of stages involved in purifications will lead to loss of yield for the amino acid as high as fifty to sixty percent .
Therefore when you are going to loose almost fifty percent amino acid , in recovery process the cost is going to be double plus the cost involved in the purification itself .
Therefore there the shift from the soluble enzyme to immobilized enzyme became a very great incentive to bring down various facets of cost and having a much cleaner process this can give a better quality product , much higher yield , ease of purification and all those advantages .
Normally when these amino acids are synthesized by chemical route , they are residual mixture of D&amp ; L and we get in final stage as DL - acyl amino acid .
When I am saying L - acyl amino acid this R could be anything the whole range of amino acids specifically in most cases depending on the amino acids there is a corresponding amino acylase .
Some of the enzymes are little less specific .
That means they can act up on two or three different amino acids but most of them are very specific to a particular amino acid and they are produced and the DL - acyl amino acid can be hydrolyzed by the suitable enzyme which hydrolyzes or … .
the particular amino acids to give the L - amino acid ; it gets deacylated and you get L - amino acid and D form remains untouched .
You get a mixture of L - amino acid and D - acyl amino acid .
These two molecules have a very distinct difference in their solubility at different pH ; very distinct .
So adjustment of pH and taking advantage of solubility the L - amino acids can be easily crystallized and produced in a very pure state without much of head ache of removing proteins or deactivation of the enzymes or separation of unconverted D form .
The same process also gave a side effect or rather a very important tool to produce D - amino acids because if the D - acyl amino acid separates out after crystallization , it can even be chemically hydrolyzed to produce D - amino acid .
There is no problem and D - amino acids are used as a raw material for many of the keto acids which are used as a raw material in pharmaceutical industries .
Until then from the residual mixture we were isolating L - amino acid and the balance was almost wasted .
Here the process of economics becomes very attractive because while you are able to isolate L - amino acid with a much better yield you are also able to use the residual material D - amino acid either if it is required for keto acids or alternatively this can again be racemised chemically or just by change of pH it gets racemised again to a DL mixture and the whole process can be repeated till almost hundred percent of the amino acid E is recovered in the L form and you get the corresponding fatty acid also produced in the system which is separated from the mixture .
Stable refers to that the enzyme , the amino acylase from aspergillus species was isolated and one of the first enzyme which was isolated was based on methionine acylase .
Methionine acylase from aspergillus orgy was isolated and immobilized by using a variety of methods and if you look into list they had used physical adsorption , ionic binding , covalent binding , cross linking in the presence of carrier , lattice entrapment and micro casual entrapment .
Almost all the methods are employed to immobilize the methionine acylase .
If you compare all the methods based on the initial quantity of amino acylase used , the activity recovered in the immobilized form and the yield level activity , the method based on immobilization of amino acylase by ionic binding to DEAE sephadex proved to be the best in terms of its enzyme activity ; seven thirteen units per gram or what ever unit they have used and with “fifty eight point nine percent ” yield of the recovery of the activity from the soluble enzyme as compared to various methods where the activity recovery as well as the final activity of immobilized preparation was much lower .
The next comparable ones were entrapment in polyacrylamide gel , covalent binding to some aryl amino glass , diazotization , but if you look into the cost of immobilization in terms of cost of reagents , covalent binding was expensive .
Gel entrapment was cheaper than Sephadex but when you look into the operational advantage you will notice that even expensive carrier was desirable and acceptable .
For designing the whole commercial process they looked at two major parameters effectively although we have much better strategy and understanding of the various design parameters for the immobilized enzyme reactor but in the process two more parameters were considered ; the effect of space velocity on the concentration of amino acid in effluent .
A space velocity is analogous to dilution rate in the CSTR and so you will notice here that the same enzyme was able to act on methionine as well as phenylalanine .
So in the two cases on the right hand side is the hydrolysis of L form .
In fact at a concentration of point one molar the reaction is stopped when almost hundred percent hydrolysis of the L isomer was completed and the kind of profile you get is almost a sigmoidal profile and at a space velocity of approximately about eight hour inverse the reaction was complete and that means hundred percent of the L isomer was hydrolyzed and recovered .
If you notice here some of the experimental conditions , amino acylase was immobilized by ionic binding to DEAE sephadex “0.2M ” concentration of substrate was used containing 5x 10 - 4 M cobalt salt which acts as stabilizing agents , stabilizer for enzymes and reaction temperature was 50 deg C .
Another parameter which they considered was the pressure drop ; probably that they considered to find out the height of the column and they noted also that the pressure drop across the column bed followed very typical fluid dynamics expressions which are available and it was proportional to the space velocity as well as height of the column .
They selected the height of the column based on the pressure drop limitations so that don ’ t have to face very severe pressure drops .
Particle size was chosen according to that .
They did not make any further analysis based on mass transfer or anything else .
Space velocity and pressure drop was the key parameters that were studied based on which the whole reactor system was designed and operated continuously .
This is a process flow diagram that is still in operation in Japan and has been in operation since 1963 , the first system which came into being and is still being operated .
As you notice here this is the storage tank for the racemic mixture which comes from chemical synthesis .
Here we pass it through a heat exchanger just to maintain the temperature fifty degrees and pass through the immobilized enzyme column .
There are arrangements for temperature , pH and flow rate control .
Then the final product from the packed bed column goes to a concentrator where it is concentrated just to take advantage of solubility and crystallization and the L - amino acid gets crystallized and the crystalline L - amino acid is separated .
Crystallization is being used as the method which is a very favorable method for purity of the product .
The D - acyl amino acid is then separated and is taken to a separate tank for racemization where pH is changed and racemization occurs and this mixture is again fed back to this tank as a racemic mixture and the whole process produces almost hundred percent conversion of DL to L - amino acids .
Alternatively there have been attempts where the D - acyl amino acid can be chemical hydrolyzed to produce D - amino acids which are also raw material for keto acids in the pharmaceutical industry The operational stability and the regeneration of the carrier are the points which I was addressing .
The actual data is that they have quite a stable performance in the sense that in about thirty two days of time of continuous operation more than 70 % of the activity is retained .
As per their plan they regenerated their material .
After one cycle when 72 % of the activity was lost they stopped the reactor ; added more enzymes whatever loss has taken place 28 % enzyme was additionally added and it accumulated so that the enzyme reaches to the original loading capacity .
Again the reactor was started and this can also be done by using multiple columns and instead of using a single column of large capacity one can breakdown the total volume in smaller capacities and stagger operation .
We will try to look at the operational part also subsequently .
Although while they operated , they operated at a single column with the break in between of the operation but today most of the immobilization enzyme columns are operated in a multiple column and staggered start up mode so that the productivity you don ’ t have to make a brake in between and the productivity and conversion can be maintained almost constant within a narrow range over a period of time .
The regenerated enzyme again went down and it can be again regenerated and this cycle is continued over almost about thirty two days period .
Look at the cost part because it is process economics and this was the data presented by the authors themselves who carried out the commercial operation and if you compare the production cost of L - amino acids by batch which was being operated originally that means prior to 1963 it was a batch soluble enzyme process and a continuous immobilized enzyme process .
This is the comparison and this is the fraction of the relative cost .
First point to be noted is that the cost of the production of the product has come down to 59 % , whatever was the original cost 100 % of the L - amino acid .
This is in the case of methionine and similar analysis applies to almost all amino acids .
The cost of production per unit quantity of the product comes down by over sixty nine point of total cost .
If you see the break up you will notice that the there is a significant change in the cost as a result of the raw material .
That means racemic mixture of amino acids , D - acylamino acid .
The cost is reduced significantly and that is bottom shaded portion and that is because of the increase in yield .
The recovery has improved so per unit cost as a result of raw material consumption has decreased .
The second part is the enzyme cost .
As expected in the case of soluble enzyme there is no recovery of enzymes and the cost of the enzyme in the case of immobilized process is very , very small almost negligible compared to this .
The third component there is significant reduction in the labor cost .
Two major factors which contribute to reduction of the cost in immobilized processes are enzyme and labor .
So that also gives us a clue about the enzymes which are more expensive .
Immobilized processes are more favorable if let us say the enzyme cost is not very high this is not going to make a dent on your process .
Similarly the recovery process involving labour if it is very tedious again immobilized enzyme processes will be more favorable .
So the labor and the enzyme cost are the major factors .
Then the fuel cost ; it makes no difference .
Another factor is the blank portion ; the cost of the carrier which is an additional input in the case of immobilized enzyme which does not exist in the case of soluble enzyme .
Although DEAE sephadex is very expensive , considered to be probably one of the most expensive carrier that is tested on all materials , the total life of the carrier which they were able to use is almost five years .
If you distribute on the total product formation that cost contribution is very , very small .
They can regenerate the carrier as and when the enzyme activity comes down ; even they can dissolve ; they can re - adsorb it and the carrier is fairly sturdy and it doesn ’ t get degenerated .
It can attain its own adsorption and they were able to use easily for periods as high as five years .
During process there might be some handling losses and which might reduce some quantity and this factor is primarily because of the handling losses during the regeneration process .
So this gives you a picture of the process economics and the contribution of different factors in the operation of an immobilized enzyme processes .
Another example that I like to illustrate is also a normal molecule , production of L - aspartic acid .
L - aspartic acid is a molecule which is used in the food industry and pharmaceutical industry and this can be produced by an aspartase , enzyme lyase which acts on fumaric acid and ammonia to give you the L - aspartic acid and the work was reported by Tosa and others in Biotech Bioengineering in 1973 .
I think you may like to go through and I suggest some of the references ; you just go through them ; you will find the experimental details as to how they arrived at the final decisions .
If you look at the same data , as we looked in the case of amino acylase , in the case of aspartase they also carried out variety of immobilization methods including the physical absorption , ionic binding , covalent binding and entrapments .
The activities of the final enzyme preparations and the percentage yield of the activity from the … .
immobilization are relatively very low here compared to the original enzyme used .
If you notice that the percentage recovery are very , very low excepting in the case of entrapment in polyacrylamide gel which resulted in the yield of over 29 % compared to amino acylase where the activity recovery was of the order of 50 % or more .
Here we have 29 % but still 29 % is the highest and probably one has to accept it .
Although they started using immobilized aspartase for producing aspartic acid they discontinued very shortly and shifted to an immobilized cell process where these losses were not there ; they immobilized the whole cell itself and the whole activity was retained and the process was more much more economical than an immobilized enzyme process .
This is just one example where I want to illustrate in what conditions you have to shift over .
If there is enzyme which is intercellular and the recovery or purification cost is very high probably immobilized cells will provide an answer .
On the other hand if the immobilization method is not able to produce or you are not able to get a good method which can recover a good yield of enzyme or the final activity in high amounts in that case also immobilized cells may be an easy or a suitable answer .
The same enzyme aspartase continuous operation in the packed bed reactor gives you the percentage of the L - aspartic acid recovered in the product stream and they carried out at two different substrate concentration 0.2M and 1M ammonium fumarate and the performance over the operating time is totally different as a function of new substrate concentration .
In the case of 1M ammonium fumarate it goes down by 50 % activity in twenty days time .
When you take lower substrate concentration , 0.2M the activity loss is much , much higher and over the same period of time instead of 50 % it reaches to about 25 % and this is the case where if you recall we discussed the substrate dependent enzyme decay .
We discussed two cases of enzyme deactivations during continuous operation of the reactor one was substrate independent where in the earlier case of aminoacylase substrate concentration plays no role and the deactivation constant is predominant but in the case of the aspartase , it is substrate dependent deactivation and higher the concentration of the substrate the operational life is comparatively better .
This is the operational profile .
For 0.2M , it deactivates much faster and you see that in twenty days time only 25 % of the enzyme is left , 75 % has got deactivated and here in the same period almost 50 % of the enzyme is present at a higher substrate concentration .
So therefore one has to also look about the deactivation kinetics because that will also play an important role .
The third and perhaps a very simplistic example is of the hydrolysis of starch for the production of glucose .
The hydrolysis of starch goes through three different stages ; gelatinization usually a heat treatment process , starch gel which is acted upon by alpha amylase which is very , very economical or very cheap enzyme cost wise .
When I say cheap I am referring to comparable cost of other enzymes and therefore it is used usually in soluble batch process at a very high temperature because the alpha amylase is a very thermo stable enzyme and can be operated at temperatures even hundred plus and therefore the gel gets immediately liquefied .
It ’ s a very fast enzyme the specific activity is very high and therefore the enzyme very speedily converts the gel into a liquefied starch .
This is a mixture of dextrins , a small chain length starch molecules ; chain length not more than ten , usually six to eight but the dextrins should not have more than ten glucose units linked together and this is the step which is the rate limiting step in the whole process , the dextrins to glucose by amyloglucosidase or glucoamylase ; it is called as glucoamylase also .
This step has been carried out using immobilized enzyme in continuous reactors so that one can take advantage and the whole process can be controlled by this step .
A very large number of studies have been carried out on immobilization of glucoamylase .
The process was designed in US by Weetall and group which was based on adsorption of glucoamylase on to porous silica .
Porous silica beads were taken and the enzyme was adsorbed on to that and the cost of the product is not very high so that one can afford this immobilization method ; even if the operational stability is not very high it doesn ’ t matter .
One of the major issues with hydrolysis of starch is in the form of the viscosity of the feed because starch hydrolysis is usually used at very high substrate concentration usually 30 - 40 % dissolved solids which makes very viscous syrup during operation and this viscosity causes a significant problem as for the pressure drop is concerned in packed bed reactors and therefore not many packed bed reactors for these steps are operational today .
Because use of packed bed reactors with an almost 40 % total solids syrup is highly energy intensive and is usually avoided .
As an alternative some people have even proposed to use a CSTR where by one can use a stirred vessel , a classical system where one can maintain the substrate feed at a constant reservoir and an agitator pedal , a stone filter just to retain the immobilized enzyme particles and the material is filtered through this stone filter and passes through a peristaltic pump to a charcoal column which removes carbon matter or other impurities .
Depending upon the further application it may be deionized and other operations may be done , concentrated and you can collect the product and this was the system which was reported for glucoamylase immobilized on DEAE cellulose by ionic binding .
The DEAE cellulose also is a very stable carrier which can be regenerated although no such commercial process is operational in the case of glucoamylase mainly because of the process economics .
Most of the process which are in use they are using adsorption onto clays , bentonite or some other clay ; not any expensive or well defined matrices .
So these are some of the illustrated examples not that these are the only processes which are operational ; a large number of other processes which are operational commercially all over the world are one is penicillin acylase .
Hydrolysis of Pen G or V goes to six APA and the six APA is an intermediate for variety of antibiotics , the semi synthetic antibiotic and they are commonly used .
Many of the immobilized penicillin acylase system have been produced wide vied and marketed .
A large number of products are available commercially .
India also is a major producer of six APA and produces significant quantity of six APA but bulk of the immobilized enzyme preparations are imported .
The products are available from many countries …… in Sweden , or … .
in UK , … .
in Japan .
Some industries which are making more immobilized enzymes here in house they are also importing the carrier .
It makes no difference if you go to the carrier bulk of the cost is already paid and and this is another example where immobilized enzymes are used commercially and in very large quantities .
Then you have inversion of sucrose a very typical illustrative example from the point of view of India .
World over the production of a glucose fructose syrup is mediated through corn .
Corn as the starting material ; Corn is hydrolyzed to produce glucose , corn …. .. starch or starch to glucose and glucose isomerisation to fructose and an equimolar mixture of glucose and fructose but in India a good quality corn meant for this purpose what we call as sweet corn is usually not available since the relative cost of the corn is also high in India , being the staple food .
So it doesn ’ t meet the requisite commercial requirements .
But still to produce glucose fructose syrup for many of the food industry applications and the major consumer of glucose fructose syrup in India is the beverage industry .
In fact most of the products for example the beverages particularly Pepsi and Coke they are based on glucose fructose syrup ; they don ’ t use sucrose as a sweetener because of the use of glucose and fructose syrup in their parent countries their processes need glucose and fructose syrup .
Otherwise the product specification will change and so in India they are using the inversion of sucrose using invertase because sucrose is available at fairly low cost and inversion of sucrose by invertase is the process which is used in India and again in the immobilized form .
There are at least three or four major units which supply glucose fructose syrup produced from sugar .
Then another process is for malic acid from fumaric acid .
The fumaric acid on hydrolysis by fumerase gives L - maleic acid which finds applications in food industry as a food additive .
As a matter of fact the conventional method other than this for maleic acid is only isolation from fruits which has to be very , very expensive compared to this method but fumaric acid is available as synthetic organic acid and fumaric acid can be converted to maleic acids for variety of applications .
Then the brewing industry uses for chill proofing of beer .
During the stages of beer after fermentation is over it is clarified and is stored for sometime .
During storage it develops a haze and this haze is as a result of reaction between polyphenolics and polypeptides because both these molecules comes from the basic raw materials .
You use barley or any other cereal … .
which have initially started to make the mess .
They contain certain polyphenolics and polypeptides and they react during storage to give you a haze and hazy beer nobody likes .
One wants a sparkling clear beer and this clarification or what they call as the term chill proofing is done by immobilized papain , a proteinase enzyme which is immobilized and used in a column because it degrades polypeptides or even polyphenol oxidase also have been used or a mixture of the two so as to degrade those molecules and remove the haze which can be filtered and clarified beer is available .
Then another application in food sector has been on lactose free milk .
Milk contains primarily lactose as a principle sugar and this lactose is an undesirable sugar for certain adults .
In India we are used to take milk and sugar is assimilated .
But in many countries the population is not able to assimilate lactose and it causes diarrhea and other kind of clinical symptoms and therefore people cannot take milk .
In those cases they produce lactose free milk by the action of beta galactosidase on milk which hydrolyses the lactose into galactose and glucose .
Galactose and glucose are assimilable or the monosaccharides which can be assimilated and without loosing any of the nutritive value the milk can be made free from lactose and are available for consumption in some of the countries .
There are many other smaller applications but these applications require the idea of methods of immobilization and their application for reactor design keeping in view the variety of issues that we have discussed in the past .
Welcome back , and we will start this tenth lecture , and we will continue our discussion on radical chain polymerization .
And , in this lecture , this tenth lecture , I will try to complete the discussion on the different type of radical initiator , which we began in the last lecture , and briefly talk about the initiator efficiency .
And then go into the mechanism and kinetics of radical polymerization , which will include the dependence of polymerization rate on initial , initiator concentration as well as monomer concentration .
And we will talk about kinetic chain length and molecular weight of the polymer produced in chain polymerization , in this case radical chain polymerization , and we will try , if time permits , we can or we will start the chain transfer .
And we talked about ; we are actually talking about different types of initiators , which can be used , or which are typically used in radical chain polymerization .
And , we talked about different types of initiator , which can be used or which can be utilized ; for example , we talked about thermal initiator , where by applying heat we can dissociate homiletically a set of molecules or different types of molecules , for example , AIBN and benzyl peroxide , which we can use for radical chain polymerization as initiator .
We were talking about other methods of chain initiation radical generation , and we started a discussion on redox initiator .
And , in the redox is basically reducing agent and the oxidizing agents , and I gave example of peroxides and a reducing agents like iron .
And , we also talked about the peroxides and amine .
And then , we start today with more options of redox initiator .
So , let us continue this redox initiator discussion .
We can take , we talked about this example of benzyl peroxide and diethyl amine in the last class .
And , we also showed the values of k d and we found that , no , we seen that k d is much higher for this redox reactions ; which means , redox reaction can be conducted redox ; they have radical polymerization where radical is generated by a redox reaction can be done at lower temperature including temperature compared to the thermal initiator .
The third type initiator redox initiation could be inorganic reductants plus inorganic oxidants , which give rise to .
The other examples could be per sulfate plus diamine , a very common or very popular use of this combination is typically used for making polyacrylamide gels , which is a combination of ammonium per sulfate APS and TEMED .
You know , this reaction is very common and done in bio chemical laboratory for making polyacrylamide gel for polyacrylamide gel electrophoreses ; TEMED is N , N , N dash , N dash , especially diamine tetra methyl ethylene diamine .
So , the combination of per sulfate plus diamine gives the radical .
Now , we , we talked about thermal initiator .
We now learned about the redox initiator .
The other examples or other types , where you can utilize is , a photo chemical initiator , photo chemical initiator or photo initiator , in short .
For example , here you can use aromatic Tetons .
In this case , on photo , these molecules can absorb photon and go to a higher excited state , which can actually dissociated , dissociate to form a couple of radical .
Now , this can also react with , or photo sensitize another molecule ; for example , if I have , from here , if I have another molecules , and if Ar is Ph .
So , here , what we are showing here that , here at aromatic teton , which on photo radiation it absorb photons and go to a higher excited state which by itself it can break or dissociate homiletically forming radicals .
Or , it can actually photo sensitize the another compound , and go to a , make a complex in excited state , which further can dissociate producing radicals ; for example , if you have it react with a molecular this , form this is the composes , and this can initiate a chain polymerization .
Simply this AIBN type molecule also can absorb photon and break into 2 radicals .
Most commercially used radical initiators are like benzoins .
For example , I have molecule like this , or you can have benzyl ketals , benzyl ketals where you have structure of that like this .
These are the main type of photo initiator or photo chemical initiator used in commercial applications .
Now , the advantage of this photochemical reactions or photo chemical initiator is that you can do your polymerization reactions locally .
If you have a , if you , if you have a reaction mixture , and if you can partition or you can cover some part with a opaque , opaque material , then the part which is exposed to the photons or light , that part will get polymerization .
So , it is , it is very , very useful to application , like film , where you can cover a part of the film , and you can keep part of the film uncovered ; where if you sign light , that part will get polymerized , leaving the part where , which is covered as unpolymerized medium .
So , if this photo polymerization method or the radical polymerization by photo initiators sometimes can be used , has a advantage ; this can be used or it is used to apply or used to make polymers in a local or in a , whatever targeted part .
The other type of initiator is like a high by , initiation by high energy , energy radiation , like gamma ray or x ray .
Now , these are very high energy .
So , it , when it reacts with , say , some organic molecule , it can form radical cat ion and eject a electron ; and this radical cat ion can dissociate into radical and a cat ion , which can capture this electron and form another radical .
There may be another possibility , where on this high energy radiation , is can capture a electron and form a radical anion ; and these radical anion can dissociate into a radical anion , and which again gives away electron to form a radical .
So , using very high energy radiation sources , we can apply or we can generate a radical , which can initiate the radical polymerization reaction .
The other type of possible initiation is the thermally induced self initiation ; that means , the monomer itself , on thermal or on heating can gives rise to , or they can generate radical , but this not a very common way of generating radical ; this is , has been proved only for , in the case of styrene .
And , this is the mechanism which is proposed for thermally induced self initiation of styrene , where styrene molecules , 2 styrene molecules by this capering first get dynamised ; and then , this dynamised styrene molecule can react with a third styrene which extract a hydrogen atom forming two radicals , which can individually initiate the chain polymers .
This is the proposed mechanism for styrene and it is initiated in troop .
But , this is , this thermal induced self initiation is not a very common and solution for styrene ; so , this is very specific case for styrene .
The other types of , there are few other special type , or very , a small applications of other types of radical generation , or other type initiator ; for example , there are electro chemical initiator , if you have a salt of carboxylic acids , and present in electro chemical cell , then in this carboxylic acids all can get ionized , oxidized to form a radical .
So , for example , if I write this ; it can give up electron in a anion den can produce radical in a electorate .
If you have a , if you want to do electro chemical polymerization or electro chemical radical polymerization , you can , you use this technique to start the polymerization .
So , by this time , we now know the different types of , different types of initiation possibilities ; that means , different types of molecules which can be used as initiator to generate radical in the reaction medium and not only the molecule , but the ways they can produce radical ; for example , by thermal , by photo , or by electro chemical , we just talked about , or the radical can be generated by a very high energy radiations like gamma ray or x ray .
Now , if you talk about , if the , all the radicals which are produced , do they , do they all react , or do they initiate a polymerization ?
Not always .
And , or the fraction of the radicals which are produced by homiletic cleavage or the redox reaction of the initiator molecules ; they are not 100 percent of those starts a chain polymerization , or the initiate chain polymerization , in part of which are get lost .
And , the fraction of which , of the radicals generated during this initiation processes which start the initiation reaction is termed as initiator efficiency .
And , is typically the initiator efficiencies , initiator efficiencies lie around say 0.3 to 0.8 , which means that the , among all the radical species which are generated around 30 percent to 80 percent of the radicals , actually generate or initiate a chain polymers .
What about , what happens is , rest of the radicals which do not generate or initiate chain polymers ?
They get destroyed to form dead molecules .
For example , if you take AIBN , you have seen that AIBN on dissociating to this , this species ; now , they can again recombine by reacting with themselves and form these molecule .
In this case , part of the radicals which were generated by homiletic cleavage of AIBN , they are getting destroyed ; in the sense , they are becoming inefficient , inefficient or dead , non radical species by reacting with themselves .
So , part of which are lost .
In propagating chain , which are expressed as , M n dot , can also react with these , a radical primary radical , and form a dead molecule .
So , by these are , these are the few ways , where the radicals which got generated by the initiator molecules , they get destroyed and form non reactive molecules .
Other examples , like we will take a benzyl peroxide example .
And , we will talk about induced decomposition of initiator ; or , if I have a propagating radical ; now , if give example of benzyl peroxide , it can , the propagating radical can react with initiator molecules and form a another radical .
Now , these molecules , in normal case , where supposed to generate 2 radicals , but in this case on reacting with a chain , propagating chain , it is only producing 1 radicals .
So , the efficiency of the radical initiator is decreased .
And , not only that , they can undergo , these radicals which are produced initially they can undergo reaction and get destroyed , or get formed into non radical species .
For example , again take the example , we can take the example of benzyl peroxide ; it get dissociated to case ; now , 2 of these can react and form C O 2 ; this can react with monomer , and there are several side reaction possible with these ; and , by this sort of side reaction ; these all can undergo phi dot plus C O 2 .
Now , this can further undergo several side reactions .
So , if there were no side reaction , the amount of radicals it was generating ; now , it has reduced because this so many side reaction .
Or , in other words , all the radicals which are getting generated by homiletic cleavage of this benzyl peroxide , they are not participating , or they are not initiating a chain ; which means , that is the , they are getting lost in doing non polymerization reaction .
So , that is the reason that not 100 percent initiator is efficient ; and part of it , which , like 30 to 80 percent of radicals generated initially ; they actually initiate a polymerization reaction .
So , we have talked about different initiator , and different way of , different types of initiator , and the how the efficiency of initiator ?
Now , let us talk about kinetics of radical polymerization .
As we know , the first step is initiation .
An initiation consist of 2 steps : 1 - initiator molecules produce 2 radical species , which is the initiating radical or is called the primary radical .
This primary radical react with a monomer R M dot .
We are just , for short , we are writing M 1 dot here .
This is chain initiating radical or species .
So , these are , the initiation step is actually consist of 2 short steps - 1 and 2 .
And , then , these chain initiating radical react with another monomer , M 1 dot plus M , M 2 dot ; this again react with forming M 3 dot .
M 2 dot is R M M dot , this is R M M M dot , and so on .
This you can write many steps , and in general , I can write dot .
Now , these steps are part of propagation .
So , we had initiation in earlier page .
Now , we know propagation , and this can undergo termination ; third step , we will talk to that in a minute .
Now , rate of polymerization , R p , is given by rate of consumption of monomers .
Now , it is assuming that the monomers which are getting consumed , they are reacting and forming polymerization , they are becoming part of polymerization .
Now , what are the step , what are the stages or what are the reactions the monomer is getting consumed ?
We talked about , in the initiation reaction ; here , the monomer is getting consumed .
So , I write , initiator rate there , and plus , all these steps .
So , if I write these steps R p 1 , R p 2 , R p n , and so on .
So , R p 1 plus , R p 2 plus , R p 3 plus , R p n plus , so on .
Now , because this is very small , very small amount of monomer get consumed in the initiation reaction , we can ignore this ; and we can write R p as a sum of all these propagating steps .
Now , if I write rate constant for these individual step as k p 1 , k p 2 , k p n , then what is the individual step ?
R p 1 is given by k p 1 , M 1 dot , M plus , R 2 is given by k p 2 , M 2 dot , M plus , so on ; and , this R p n is given by k p n , M n dot , M .
Now , it is very difficult .
If you want to find out these , you have to know all these rate constant - k p 1 , k p 2 , k p n , k p 3 , k p 4 , and all this things ; that is practically impossible .
So , what is assumed ?
That , all these rate constant for all these propagating reactions , they are same .
It is similar to the assumption we made for step growth polymerization , the assumption of equal reactivity of the functional group .
So , remember , we talked about in step polymerization that the reactivity of the functional group present at the end of the oligomeric chain or a polymeric chain , does not depends on what is present in the other side , whether the other group is reacted , or what is the length the oligomer .
Similarly , in this case , the reactivity of this radical does not depend ; we are assuming that it does not depend on the size of the molecules .
So , there is a M 1 , M 2 , or , because the system is large , and we know that it has been experimentary proof also that , the rates , rate constants become very , or becomes same as long as , as soon as they become this chain contain 2 to 3 monomers ; as long as these chains are 2 to 3 monomers , the rates , all the rates become , all the rate constants become equal .
So , that is the assumption we are making that , all these rate constants are equal ; and , so , we can write all the rate constant as k p , and M is there , and everywhere .
So , I can name M ; and also , we are drawing , write the summation of M i dot .
So , these all are same ; k p 1 , k p 2 , k p n , these are all same .
So , I can take it out .
And , then , M is present in everywhere .
So , M is also taken out .
And , a summation of all the other terms , M 1 dot , M 2 dot , M 3 dot , M n dot .
So , this is i , i dot .
So , these term , I can simply write k p M and M dot ; I am just writing the M dot .
So , M dot is ; this is the summation of the concentration of all the radicals present ; all the propagating radicals present in the reaction medium .
So , these ; so , R p now given up , given by k p rate constant for all those individual steps , monomer concentration , and this is the summation of the concentration of all the propagating radicals of the , all the chain radicals ; this is the sum of all those things .
Now , experimentally , or ; this is the unknown quantity .
We cannot , this is very difficult to measure this , this quantity experimentally .
So , how do you get this rate of polymerization ?
We assume a steady state , where ; now , immediately after the reaction starts , the change in radical , total radical concentration becomes 0 with time ; which means that , the radicals are consumed at the same rate , as they are getting produced .
Now , radical get produced in the initiation reaction and they get destroyed in the termination reaction , which we just going to talk in a minute .
So , as soon as the reaction start , within a very short period of time , the rate of initiation becomes same as rate of termination ; as a result , the concentration of these total radical species , rate radical propagating radical become constant at during the entire polymerization reaction ; and that is not very unusual , because we , when we do the kinetics of the first reactions with having intermediates , then we always assume steady state , and we do the kinetics in that way .
So , in a steady state , the rate of initiation is equals to rate of termination .
Now , what is the rate of termination ?
We talk about termination step now .
How this radical , M n dot , they can get terminated ?
If I talk about the , that same structure , take out that same simple monomer ; now , how this can get terminated ?
They can get terminated reacting with the same molecule , and by coupling reaction they can .
So , that is k termination by coupling ; this is a coupling process .
So , if I write this as M n dot , this is a M m dot , then this will be M n plus m .
Now , they can get terminated by other type of reaction , disproportionate reaction as well .
Disproportionation , 2 of these .
For example , if I talk about methyl methacrylate , like this is the form to difference this .
So , if I write M n dot here , and this is M m dot , and this reaction is k termination by disproportionation , then it gives again M n plus M m .
So , here , the molecular weight , on termination the molecular weight does not change , ignoring the difference of 2 hydrogen here , between this two .
So , in this case , the molecular weight remain unchanged ; it becomes the dead polymers , as same as the size of the reacting polymer .
Where , in the earlier case , it is , the length of the final terminated chain is the summation of the size of the 2 reacting species .
Now , in general , we can write M n dot plus M m dot gives write k t is the dead polymer .
So , if I write this , then it , in general , it takes care of both the coupling reaction and the initiation .
In both cases , these 2 radical , propagating radical reacting and forming dead polymer .
So , what is the rate of this termination step ?
Is given by k t M dot square , because it is a bi molecular reaction .
So , now , this is again , the M dot is the summation of concentration of the , all the propagating radical .
So , now , I write this rate of termination is now got there it is a bi molecular reaction .
So , k t multiplied by M dot square .
So , from that we can find the M dot as R i by k t , to the power half .
Now , in some cases , in some text , they follow that R t is , rate of termination is twice k t M dot square .
Now , this term twice is introduced ; in some text , this twice is introduced , because that the 1 termination reaction is effective in bringing the termination of 2 radical .
So , this 2 terms we introduced .
Now , if is , it is up to you , whether you want to write 2 , or if you do not want to write 2 ; but , if you write 2 here , then similarly when in initiation reaction a homiletic cleavage gives up 2 radicals , you have to write 2 as well .
So , that gives , 2 cancels out .
And , if you choose not to write 2 , then during the initiation reaction also you have to choose not to write 2 in the ; it will come back that initiation reaction , rate of initiation , again when you write the expression for R i , rate of initiation .
So , R p , rate of polymerization , polymerization , we have deduced earlier , M n dot , which will now become M R I by k t ; now , let us write 2 here ; let us follow this convention .
So , I write 2 , and this is what the rate of polymerization is .
So , we have to know R i .
Now , R i is , this is for thermal initiation .
So , how do I write the R i ?
We write , this is k d I .
Now , again , because this is produced and we are following that , we should write 2 here , during the termination rate .
So , here also we write 2 .
And , also , with our knowledge , that all the radicals which are generated by the homiletic cleavage of the initiator molecule , they do not react or they do not initiate the chain polymerization ; the fraction of the radicals which generated here , some of them actually initiate the radical polymerization ; and so , we multiplied term f , which is here the efficiency .
So , this would give the total expression for the rate of initiation ; rate constant of the dissociation , initiate the concentration , this is the efficiency of initiator , and 2 we are writing because we are following the same conventions 2 here , and the logic is that because 1 initiator molecule is giving up 2 radicals which are initiating 2 chains , we are writing 2 here .
Now , if we go back and look at this or compare this initiation reaction which we wrote earlier , and you can argue that we are not , we are not talking about , or we are taking , not taking this reaction in the consideration , when we are determining R i .
Now , they are fact that this is the very first reaction .
These , as well as the all the propagating reactions , they are very fast compared to the initial dissociation reaction of the initiator molecule into 2 react , 2 radicals .
So , the initiation reaction actually depend on the first step , not atall on the second step .
So , when we are considering rate of initiation , we are only taking or only considering , considering this k d , not the k i .
So , that , this is clear that , inspite of they having 2 step in the initiation process , we are taking the slower step which is basically the rate determining step for the initiation process .
So , finally , let us talk about the final expression for rate of polymerization .
This rate of polymerization R p .
Now , this is for thermal initiator ; it is given by , R p is given by k t , k p , M , R i ; R i is twice f k d I , twice k t to the power half .
This 2 cancels out .
So , k p , M , f k d , I , k t , to the power half .
Now , this is for thermal initiator .
What is , it would look like , for a redox initiator ?
A redox initiator is , rate of initiator is , k d , concentration of reductant oxidant .
So , R p would be k p , M , k d , oxidant by reductant concentration by , twice k t to the power half .
For a photo chemical initiation or photo initiation , R i is twice fie I a ; I a is the intensity of the radiation , and fie is the quantum yield for initiation is similar to efficiency f for thermal initiation , this fie is the quantum yield for initiation .
So , for this type of initiation , we can write R p is M , fie I a by k t , to the power half .
So , we talked about a different , the most common rate expression for rate of polymerization ; whether it is , it has initiated by thermal initiator or redox initiator or by photo chemical initiation , these are the most common root of initiating a radical polymerization .
So , we know the rate expressions for the rate of polymerization .
Now , let us go back and look at this thermal initiator , which is the most common ; R p is given by this , which means rate of polymerization is directly proportional to the concentration of monomer ; and , it is actually directly proportional to the square root of the concentration of initiator .
So , R p is proportional to the concentration of the monomer , and it is proportional initiator concentration .
So , if you increase the concentration during a radical polymerization , then you know the rate will increase , but of course at the proportional to the square root of the initiator concentration ; and , if you increase the monomer concentration , then rate will be a increasing , rate of polymerization would be increasing in , as a direct , directly proportion .
So , if you plot ; and , this has been shown experimentally ; if I have this plot R p , rate of polymerization with I to the power half square root of I , it gives a straight line , so as this .
Now , sometimes , experimentally it is found , then it is not a directly proportional to the power for initiator ; it could be more than 1 .
So , like 3 by 2 , some cases , experimentally it might , you might find out or some cases it might be even lower .
Now , that indicates that , now that indicates that ; see if we , if the rate of polymerization dependent not directly , not to the power 1 , but more than 1 select 3 by 1.5 ; which means , that this monomer also taking part in generating radicals .
So , that might have in few cases , where the monomer can take part in homiletic cleavage and generate radical , or it can react with some other molecule , initiator molecules and produce the radical .
So , it the monomer itself take part in the initiation reaction , then there is another terms comes .
So , you get a half here , a additional half .
So , this becomes 1.5 .
Similarly , if you see that this is not following , this actually following even less than that ; which means , that some of the initiator react initiator which are produced , they are actually ; even you know they form the radicals which are produced by , and form the initiator molecules , they are not taking part .
So , the efficiency actually comes down , came down during the reaction .
So , which also means that as the reaction progress , both the concentration of monomer and the initiator comes down ; which means , as the reaction progress with time , the rate of polymerization also comes down .
But there is , there is the special case at the end of the reaction , if the monomer concentrating I , which we will talk about in the later lecture .
So , again to form , again write the ; now if you go back to this expression , besides this term , this is called as concentration term monomers ; and , the concentration of monomer and concentration of initiator , these are also determine your rate of polymerization .
So , and which will depend upon the temperature .
If we increase the temperature , then depending how it is effecting the values of k d I , k t and R p , the rate will vary .
Now , we will come in the later lecture , what is the effect of temperature on a rate of polymerization ?
Now , let us talk about a molecular weight in radical chain polymerization .
Now , before we molecule , we come to the discussion of molecular weight , we will define a term kinetic chain length , nu , which is average number of monomers polymerized per each radical , which initiate a polymer chain .
So , it is a average number of monomers which polymerize per radical ; per radical , which actually polymerize , which actually initiate the polymerization ; not the , as we said that some of the radicals get , you know , consumed by side reactions , or some other reactions , we do not initiate polymer chain .
And , this is the average number of monomers polymerized per radicals which initiate a polymer chain .
So , it is , how can you write in simple term ?
It is rate of polymerization , divided by rate of termination , or as steady state assumption , it is same as the radius of a rate of initiation .
So , we can write nu as k p M ; from your the last expressions , which we decided in the last few pages , we can write these as same .
And , if we consider only the case of thermal initiator , then nu is equal to R p by R I , k p M .
So , nu is the average number of monomers which is getting polymerized per radicals .
You should consider the radicals which are only , the only those radicals which are initiating a polymer chain .
So , what would be the average molecular ?
What will be the relation between the degrees or average degrees of polymerization with nu ?
And , how these are related ?
Average degrees of polymerization and this nu , if the polymerization is done by coupling , coupling , then M n would be , X n bar would be , the average degrees of polymerization would be twice nu ; nu is the average number of monomers consumed in this chain .
So , the degrees of polymerization will be summation of this , plus this .
And , we are talking about average .
So , it is 2 nu .
If it is gets terminated by the disproportionation reactions , we seen earlier ; then average degrees of polymerization is nu , because the number of monomers , average numbers of monomers per radical is the size of this chain .
And , we know that X n is M w , M n bar is M 0 X n bar .
So , which means , if the kinetic chain length ; there are kinetic chain length which basically , a number of radicals , number of monomers which consumed per radicals .
So , you have a radical propagating chain and another propagating chain .
If they are in , terminated by a coupling reaction , then you have twice nu is the molecular weight , average molecular , average degrees of polymerization ; whereas , if they are terminated by disproportion reactions , then the average degrees of polymerization would be equals to the kinetic chain length nu .
And , how do you determine , what are the number of molecules ?
If they are terminated by coupling reaction , then every dead chain would have two species from the initiator molecule , the fragments , residual fragment form initiator molecule .
And if they are terminated by disproportionation , then they will have 1 residue from the initiator molecules .
Now , what we will do in the next lecture ?
We will continue from these , and talk about termination reactions or transfer reactions .
You may recall that earlier we have outlined various ways of the mechanisms by which enzymes catalyze chemical reactions .
One of the unique features of the enzymesí catalytic function is their specificity .
In fact when we distinguish them or when we compare them with a variety of chemically catalyzed reactions or even uncatalyzed reactions they are distinguished by virtue of their specificity .
In the case of chemical catalyst a single catalyst may catalyze a large variety of similar reactions .
If you consider nickel as the catalyst all the hydrogenation reactions can be catalyzed by that .
Similarly in the case with colloidal platinum or vanadium pentoxide or even acids acts as a catalyst .
For large variety of hydrolytic reactions acids or hydrogen ions can act as a catalytic function .
On the other hand when we talk about enzymes these functions are highly specific .
In most cases the enzymatic catalytic function is both substrates specific as well as product specific .
That means you need different enzymes to act on different substrates or to produce a particular product different enzymes are needed .
There is a significant variety as for as specificity is concerned .
All the enzymes are not specific to the same extent .
There is lot of variation in terms of their characteristic features required as a specific catalyst .
In many cases the enzymes may exhibit a very broad specificity not too strictly specific .
A large number of examples which you may be familiar with are what we call as group specific enzymes .
A characteristic example of these kinds of enzymes is hexokinase .
Hexokinase phosphorylate hexose to a hexose phosphate through involvement of ATP , a very characteristic enzyme .
This enzyme particularly will be able to act upon a large variety of hexose as a substrate and it can phosphorylate .
It is not very strictly specific in that sense and we call it as group specific .
That means it is involved in the transfer of a phosphoryl group from ATP to a given range of substrate .
Similarly in the case of alcohol , an alcohol dehydrogenase which also involves NAD gives the corresponding aldehyde .
Another example of a group specific enzyme , whereby the variety of alcohols particularly primary alcohols are oxidized to their corresponding aldehyde involve NAD , NADH system as a cofactor .
These enzymes are often involved in many of the constitutive functions of a living cell where the cell wants a very broad specificity and thatís why the nature has evolved these group specific enzymes .
There are certain enzymes which are highly specific and exhibit absolute specificity .
When I say absolute specificity I mean that the enzyme can recognize only one substrate .
If you consider the same class of hexokinase a very closely related enzyme is what we call as gluco - kinase .
This accepts only glucose as a substrate and phosphorylate to gluco - 6 - phosphate .
No other excess sugar is acted upon by such an enzyme .
They show absolute specificity .
The most absolute specificity in terms of an enzyme , with which some of you may be familiar , is oxidation of ﬂ - D - glucose to glucono lactone by glucose oxidase a fungal enzyme which is produced by Aspergillus niger .
This acts on not only on D - glucose , but it accepts only ﬂ - D - glucose and a - D - glucose is just not accepted .
If you consider a - D - glucose the particular enzyme doesnít act or for that matter even if you go to another isomer of glucose say galactose it doesnít act on even galactose , which is not very different , excepting that these hydroxyl and hydrogen atoms are inter changed .
These are the types of the enzymes which fall in the category of absolute specificity .
Then we have a number of enzymes which show stereo chemical specificity .
That means they recognize the arrangement of atoms at a carbon atom at which stereo isomerism can occur .
There are large varieties of enzymes .
If you consider the example of let us say lipase .
Lipase from various sources can exhibit specificity , only one of the isomer either l or d isomer .
There are a large number of such examples in the chemical literature or the bio chemical literature .
The only enzyme which is known to act on both the stereoisomers or the enzymes whose function is to interconvert L and D isomers are usually called as racemases .
For example L - alanine to D - alanine .
While alanine racemase can act on either side of the reaction , it is a reversible reaction and therefore it can act on both L - alanine as well D - alanine .
This is the only one classical example where an enzyme can act on both stereoisomers .
Otherwise most of the enzyme will exhibit stereochemical specificity and if there is an asymmetric carbon atom it will only accept one of the isomers and not the other .
The stereochemical specificity can extend to the level that enzyme acting on a non assymetric molecule can produce one of the isomers as a product .
The typical example is glycerol kinase .
Glycerol as we know is CH2OH - CHOH - CH2OH .
It is a non - assymetric product .
The carbon atom in both the ñCH2OH are identical .
But the enzyme acts on glycerol molecule and produces L - glycerol - 3 - phosphate .
That means the enzyme transfers again the action of ATP to ADP .
The enzyme transfers phosporyl group to the third carbon atom of the glycerol molecule .
Although the one and three are identical still it is able to exhibit the stereochemical specificity in terms of product formation .
What we must appreciate is that the variety of specificity that can occur in the case of enzymatic reaction can be very loosely specific in terms of group specific enzymes , absolute specificity with respect to a single substrate ; it can be stereochemically specific with respect to substrate or with respect to product .
Therefore in summary the enzyme will exhibit specificity both with respect to substrate as well as with respect to product .
As I explained earlier the glycerol molecule is a symmetric molecule .
There is no asymmetry in this .
But the enzyme glycerol kinase acts only on the third carbon .
You can analyze the product and see where the phosporyl group has gone .
Thatís why Iím saying first and third are similar but the enzyme transfers phosporyl group on to the third carbon atom .
Consider the structural conformation of glycerol .
This is one , two and three and this acts only on the third one which is on the left hand side .
We are expressing here our conformation on a planar diagram .
When you look at a three dimensional space , in a three dimensional space the one and three will not be in the same plane .
The specificity can have a very large variety and one must also appreciate that the specificity of these enzymes in terms of their catalytic action is attributed to the active sites .
As we also saw in the last lecture where the catalytic function was studied , the catalytic functions of the enzymes are responsible for the role played by active site .
The specificity also is the result of the conformation of active site .
We also saw that the active site will include the binding process .
That means certain functional group on the substrate will bind to certain active sites and the active sites will have certain catalytic sites which will interact with the functional residues on the substrate molecule which has to undergo change , the bonds that has to be broken .
The active sites must be considered as consisting of two different parts : the binding sites and the functional sites .
Another factor of stereospecificity is that prediction of stereospecificity by any ground rule is difficult .
We are able to know the specificity only while we determine the amount of product formed on a particular substrate .
In the case of a chemical reaction to take place you have ?
G value , the free energy change of the reaction , which will give you an idea whether the reaction will take place in the forward direction or reverse direction or there will be an equilibrium established .
But in the case of specificity of enzyme action the only way to understand the specificity is that we monitor the product formed on the substrate and then we can say yes this is specific to the substrates .
Once we find the specificity then we can propose hypothesis or mechanisms by which the stereo specificity can be explained .
But there are no other thermodynamic or kinetic interpretations which can be applied to the specificity .
That is another feature .
One of the most interesting features of enzyme specificity is their stereochemical specificity because when there is a single molecule the functional groups are different , active sites also may have different functional groups to bind them and the steps can be understood .
But to understand the stereochemical specificity that how enzyme is able to identify the two different stereoisomers , the minimum requirements on the function of an active sites was proposed by Oxten as early as 1948 .
He proposed that at least there must be three sites of different points of interaction on an enzyme active site .
Here the bottom one is the whole enzyme molecule and the dotted line represents the active sites .
I must again remind you that this is not a planar site .
It is a three dimensional structure on the surface of the enzyme molecule and not that all the amino acids on these active sites are located in proximity in the amino acid chain .
They are brought in proximity by folding of the enzyme protein .
Let us say a substrate has to undergo reaction which has three functional group represented by Rí , Ríí or Rííí .
At least it is understood that as proposed by Oxten that the enzyme active site also must have at least three different functional residues on the active site which can interact with the substrate molecule .
These three interacting sites let us consider that they are the interaction sites .
Minimum two of them must be binding sites , out of the three at least two on which the substrate molecule can bind to the active site and put the substrate in a very fixed orientation .
We have two points .
We are holding the enzyme molecule bound to the substrate .
This binding has to be oriented in such a way that the third functional group on the substrate which has to undergo reaction is brought in vicinity of the catalytic site .
That is one minimum requirement for explaining the specificity of enzyme action that there must be minimum three sites which interact between the enzyme and substrate .
Two of them must be at least binding sites and the substrate binds on these two sites to the enzyme molecule whereby it orients the substrate molecule along with the enzyme such that the reactive functional group and the reactive site on enzymes active site come in proximity or in vicinity .
Of course the various mechanisms that we discussed it could be a strain on the bond , it could be the entropic factors and it could be various covalent interactions or electro static interactions that might play a role to carry out the catalysis .
But as far as the binding is concerned , it has to be specific in terms of bringing the functional group on which the reaction has to take place .
I will try to explain the same points with a particular example of oxidation of a D - amino acid , using D - amino acid oxidase where you have this amino group which undergoes reaction .
In the molecule the carboxylic group and the methyl group are bound onto the enzyme active site .
The one which binds methyl group will be hydrophobic in nature and this will be bound predominantly by electrostatic interactions .
These two binding brings the catalytic sites in close vicinity of the amino group which is available for reaction and the catalytic reaction can take place .
This is your D - amino acid .
You consider corresponding L - amino acid on which the location of H and amino group will be different .
Even if the binding takes place this amino group cannot come in the vicinity of the catalytic site , cannot approach the catalytic site and no reaction can occur .
That is why the concept of three interacting sites fairly explains the position of enzymes catalytic action as far as their specificity with respect to stereo isomers is concerned .
The situation in the case of different substrates which can have different functional groups can be much simpler .
Because the binding site will bind two of the functional group , the third functional group which has to undergo reaction will be only recognized by the catalytic site and no other functional group will be recognized and so reaction cannot take place .
One of the very early understanding that as early as 1890 , Oxten proposed such a mechanism which puts a limit just like in the case of rate of a reaction we have a thermo dynamic limit .
If there is a reversible reaction , these are the kind of limits like equilibrium constant will be achieved at this point and so on .
Similarly Oxten proposed a limit that minimum there must be three points of interaction .
In case of very hard core specific enzymes the point of interaction can be more than three also .
Instead to two binding sites there can be three binding sites also .
That depends on the requirement for the enzyme .
As early as in 1890 , Fischer proposed Lock and key hypothesis which explained the enzyme specificity .
This explanation of the specificity was purely based on certain observations and analysis of the situation mostly mental and not analytical because not many analytical facilities were available .
It was suggested that the enzyme active site and the substrate have a conformation which is analogous to lock and the key .
That means the Ö. .. on the key are exactly fitting to the site at which it has to interact with the lock .
They are exactly fitting .
Here you have the active site , the sites on which the binding groups available on the substrate binds and this portion shows the substrate which is analogous to the key .
This is the active site which is analogues to the lock .
The binding sites on the substrate come in proximity or bind to the binding site on the active site of the enzyme molecule .
Similarly the reactive group on the substrate comes in contact with two catalytic sites and then once the reacting groups gets entangled with the reaction sites on the active sites , the binding is complete and it can exhibit the catalytic function to take place .
Now that was the understanding and they also very clearly understood at that time that both substrate as well as the active site on the enzyme molecule have rigid structures .
There is no question of change if they are rigid in nature .
They are just like a lock and key ; there is no flexibility .
If there is slight modification either in the conformation of the key it will not fit to the lock and thereby the reaction will not occur .
In fact the Fischerís lock and key arrangement was not based on any of the analytical probes .
It was only a conceptual explanation given because at that time , one thing we must appreciate that , not a very large number of enzyme reactions were understood .
Even the stereospecificity was not clearly understood .
It was mostly some very common reactions like hydrolysis of sucrose to glucose and fructose , most of the hydrolytic reactions were understood and this mechanism proposed only such a macro understanding that the substrate and the enzyme have rigid conformations which are complementary to each other and which fit in strictly .
At the time of Fischerís Lock and key mechanism , the most understood enzymatic reaction was hydrolysis of sucrose by invertase to glucose and fructose and obviously they would look into variety of other sugars like lactose on which the enzyme could not act .
They could distinguish between the conformations of the substrate molecule and have much detailed information .
But still the surprising thing is that the concept is not totally invalid today .
In many cases it can still explain the whole theory or whole requirements of specificity .
Then came number of other developments and particularly the development with respect to the availability of analytical data on enzyme substrate binding .
People were able to make enzyme substrate complexes and their analogs , analyze them by NMR or EPR or variety of analytical physical tools and they found that when the enzyme and substrate do bind there is a significant change in the conformation .
The conformation is neither the same what was available in the case of enzyme molecule .
So there is something going on and keeping those data in view Koshland proposed a hypothesis as late as 1958 what we understand today as Koshland induced fit model .
His proposal was a slight modification of the lock and key arrangement .
He said that the substrate has a rigid conformation with its binding sites and the functional site or the reacting groups present at a particular conformation .
But the enzyme active site is not a rigid conformation .
Itís a flexible conformation .
That means as soon as the substrate comes in the proximity of the enzyme active site , initial binding takes place .
The enzyme active site binds onto the substrate molecule .
For example this is a functional group and this let us say is substrate .
The enzyme active site as soon as it comes in proximity , it wraps around the substrate molecule .
He gave an example that the interaction between the substrate and the enzyme is some thing like a hand and the woolen glove .
You wear a woolen glove .
Your hand is analogues to substrate .
Then when you put in the woolen glove it exactly fits into hand depending upon the conformation of your fingers .
Everything goes in line and interacts with different fingers and one can be comfortable and the reaction can proceed .
The basic difference was while the lock and key mechanism or hypothesis proposed both the components to be rigid , in the Koshland induced fit model it was very clearly understood that the substrate may be rigid but the enzyme active sites are not rigid conformations as you can see here .
For example you have two binding sites .
The free active site on the free enzyme molecule without interaction with the substrate has its particular configuration where the catalytic sites and binding sites are distantly located .
As soon as the binding groups come in contact with the binding site as they have interacted here the active site undergo a change in conformation and this catalytic sites are brought in proximity so as to wrap around the reactive group on the substrate molecule and then the ultimate conformation of the enzyme substrate complex which can use one of the mechanism by which catalytic reaction can take place , can be applied .
Such a mechanism very effectively can explain the high degree of the specificity for the enzyme molecule .
In the case of induced fit hypothesis one can also appreciate that in certain reactions for example even if there is reaction contaminant in the reaction mixture which are very similar to nature in the terms of their conformation to the actual substrate , they will not be able to interact .
For example in the case of lock and key mechanism if there are molecules which are similar in conformation they might be able to partly interact with the catalytic site and influence the reaction .
Whereas in the case of the induced fit mechanism once the enzyme active site is totally wrapped around the substrate , the reaction sites are not at all available for any other contaminant and therefore there is no chance of any other contaminant present in the substrate molecule to be able to interact with the enzyme molecule .
One of the most typical examples of enzyme catalyzed reaction which was responsible for the elucidation of induced fit model was the hexose kinase .
The phosphorylation of D - hexose at the expense of ATP to hexose - 6 - phosphate .
In the absence of hexose , the ATP hydrolyzed extremely slowly .
The hydrolysis of ATP is a spontaneous reaction but in the absence of hexose it will hydrolyze only very slowly .
The hexose is present in the proximity of the enzyme , the enzyme will bring both hexose and ATP along with the binding sites and then it can flop around the two molecules and the reaction can take place in a very fast speed .
The induced fit mechanism can also explain very clearly the bimolecular reactions which were difficult to understand as far as the lock and key arrangement .
Lock and key arrangement was very easily able to explain the unimolecular reactions .
But in case where two substrates are involved as in the case of hexose phosphorylation , the role of hexose and ATP both participating at the binding site for the reaction to occur could be explained using induced fit mechanism .
If you consider all the three explanations that we have considered today like Oxtenís three site interaction model , lock and key mechanism of Fischer or induced fit hypothesis of Koshland , when we talk about the specificity they donít link specificity by any means to the catalytic function .
They consider specificity totally in isolation .
They only say that after all these interactions have taken place some of the reaction mechanism responsible for catalytic function will take place and the reaction is catalyzed .
None of them is able to provide a suitable explanation for the catalytic function .
When we discussed the various ways in which the enzymes are able to catalyze reactions we understood that binding of the enzyme to the substrate was a very important feature in the acceleration of the reaction rate .
Binding of the substrate to the enzyme involves some expenditure of energy that is the binding energy involved in it which ultimately gives you an advantage in the reduction in activation energy and there is an initial energy .
It is also presumed that this binding energy is not totally a wasteful energy for the enzyme reactions .
A part of this binding energy also contributes to specificity and therefore if you look at the effect of strains that are developed , a hypothesis which is called as a strain that means at the stage of binding we understood that in the case of lock and key mechanism they are rigid .
But we might assume that the active site is almost complementary to the substrate molecule but is not exactly complementary , a situation which is slightly closer to lock and key mechanism not in absolute terms that they are complementary but they are not exactly complementary .
Therefore when the substrate and the enzyme active sites are brought in proximity and the binding takes place between the substrate and the enzyme active site it brings in a strain .
You see that the active site here unlike the lock and key mechanism is not exactly complementary .
This slot is slightly longer and therefore while the binding takes place it makes a sort of a strain onto the reactive group and it is analogues to the mechanism which we proposed for catalytic function that means strain mechanism and which contributes to reduction in the enthalpic component of the free energy of activation .
During this interaction of the enzyme active site with the substrate , the strain produced onto the reactive group as a result of binding process is responsible for specificity as well as part catalytic function .
These strain developed may contribute towards the reduction in activation energy but it is a result of binding process .
This binding process brings in the specificity and the nature of the binding site or the active site on the enzyme molecule is slightly complementary or of the similar type but not exactly complementary and the complementarity comes only after binding has taken place which results in the distortion of the reacting group and then the complementary comes in .
So that is called the strain effect which can take into account both catalytic function as well as specificity .
The strain effects have been discussed when we were talking about the ways in which the enzyme reduces energy of activation .
The strain on the reacting group was one of the mechanisms .
Because the active site is not exactly complementary , after the substrate approaches the binding sites it forces the reacting group to develop a strain so as to bring in complementary to the catalytic sites .
Then only these catalytic sites can combine .
Otherwise if it was totally complementary without the strain then the reacting group will come down some where here and no reaction can take place .
Only when a strain is developed the reaction takes place and the reaction takes place with the suitable degree of specificity introducing to it .
Because the binding has to take place and the binding process requires a strain onto the substrate molecule so that it comes in proximity of the catalytic sites .
If strain is not developed it will remain in the binding site but not at the active site .
The enzyme will not be able to provide the catalytic function .
Like in the case of other mechanisms or other hypothesis proposed for specificity while we are able to explain that binding will take place , the functional group comes in proximity to the reacting group but it doesnít explain if the reaction will take place or not .
Just coming in proximity could provide you an effect what we discussed like high substrate concentration in the proximity of the active site but does not explain you how the energy of activation is induced .
Here in this case this also explains how the energy of activation is reduced in terms of its enthalpic contribution .
Another thing which is very well related to this strain mechanism is the mechanism what we understand as transition state stabilization .
Here in the case the effect is almost very similar to what we call as strain effect but while the substrate enzyme binding takes place at the active site there are still some unfavorable interactions at the active site of the substrate That means the substrate molecule in the vicinity of the active site is not very comfortable in terms of its interactions .
There are many other unfavorable interactions available at the active site and these interactions tend to distort the substrate in such a way so that it favors the formation of a complex which is analogues to structure in transition state .
The presence of certain unfavorable interactions at the active site for the substrate when the binding has taken place tends to distort the substrate molecule in the direction so that the enzyme substrate complex tends to become complementary to the transition state .
In the first characteristic feature of catalysis we saw that the transition state is complementary to enzyme substrate complex and not the substrate .
The enzyme is complementary to enzyme substrate complex , the enzyme active site and not to the substrate itself .
Therefore the role of the binding of substrate molecule to the enzyme at the binding site , the substrate doesnít remain very comfortable .
There are many unfavorable interactions that is present there and they distort the substrate molecule so that these enzyme substrate binding approaches towards that of transition complex .
The first step is binding of the binding sites onto the active site .
Once that takes place , still the catalytic sites are not approached by the functional groups which are likely to undergo reaction .
But in addition to the binding site there are many unfavorable interactions present between the substrate and the active site .
Consider three different functional groups .
In addition to that on the active site there will be many more amino acid residues which will be in the proximity and they might provide some kind of unfavorable interactions .
Now these interactions tend to distort the substrate and this distortion of the substrate is favored towards reaching the transition state .
In fact the basic role is played by the unfavorable interactions present in the active site .
In other words we are developing a strain onto the substrate molecule so that the substrate molecule reacting groups are coming in proximity to the catalytic site .
In the hypothesis of the transition state stabilization it is stated that the unfavorable interactions available at the active sites on the substrate favors the distortion of the substrate in such a way that the final enzyme substrate complex approaches the structure of that of transition state .
The energy required to reach the transition state is already reduced .
Because partly you have already taken up that path .
That is what happened in strain development also .
Part of the energy required for energy of activation is already met by strain onto the substrate molecule .
So these are some of the major mechanisms that have been proposed for explaining the specificity of the enzyme action .
It is over all rate of reaction in terms of rate of product formation that indicates whether the enzyme is specific to a substrate or not .
What is the order of specificity , to what extent it would be specific , what are the impurities which can interfere in the specificity they are all related to the results of reaction that is the rate of formation of product .
The specificity also has a very significant role in terms of the industrial applications of enzymes .
We must also appreciate that while in the case of the catalytic function we understand that if the rate of reaction is increased its usefulness as a industrial catalyst is also very high because higher the rate of reaction you can very efficiently use it for industrial purposes .
But what is the role of specificity .
The specificity in fact has both negative as well as positive role .
Positive role in the sense , that you can restrict the formation of any of the by - products .
Even if your feed history substrate is impure to some extent you will know that only reaction which can be catalyzed specifically by that enzyme which you are providing will take place and no other reaction will take place .
Even the side products formed by action of water usually most of the organic chemists consider water for organic chemical reactions as the culprit because it can lead to variety of side products .
So all the side products can be absent , which can make our life comfortable as far as the purification of the product is concerned .
That is one of the major advantage but the major disadvantage or drawback from the industrial application point of view is that the specificity requires a single enzyme to be produced for each reaction , as the engineer will appreciate that the benefits of scale of operation for the enzyme production is lost .
That means many of the enzymes cannot be produced on a very massive scale because the requirement will be only for single reaction and therefore for a single reaction the requirement will not be very large .
So obviously you have to produce them on a very small scale and producing on small scale will lead to high cost of production .
That is why the enzymes still remain expensive catalyst compared to chemical catalyst .
For example in the case of chemical catalyst Raneyís nickel , it is the catalyst used for all hydrogenation reactions in the organic chemical field and we can produce them in bulk quantities and the cost of production can be reasonably low .
On the other hand if you have to produce glucose oxidase , which acts only on ﬂ - D - glucose not on a - D - glucose or any other hexose , itís requirement will be only for oxidation of glucose which will restrict its application and therefore the scale of operation .
The specificity must be looked in from both the angle and in many cases today people are applying the development of molecular biology particularly in sense of protein engineering to modify the substrate specificity both when we want the absence of side products to make it more specific as well as when we want broad specificity so that the same enzyme can be applied to a large variety of substrates .
We are trying to broaden the specificity through protein engineering methods .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
We will continue in this lecture our discussion which we are having the last lecture on polymers in solution .
In last lecture , we started lattice theory of solutions of small molecules and then , we introduced the thermodynamic probability and Boltzmann equation , how to get this combinatorial entropy from number of distinguishable this degenerate arrangements of a system .
Then , we started our discussion on Flory - Huggins theory on polymer solution .
In this case , if you can recollect that polymer molecules , because their size was quite different from the solvent molecules , each polymer molecules were divided into x segments , where each segment was having same size with the size of a solvent .
Then with this total segments and the solvent molecules were placed in the 3D lattice like the small molecules .
First we introduced the polymer molecules one by one in case of each polymer molecule , segment by segment and then once all the polymers molecules were introduced in the lattice , then we added all the solvents .
In that process , we calculated how many different ways , how many distinguishable ways we can introduce all the polymer segments .
Then , we got the entropy of the mixture from the Boltzmann expression and then , we deduce or deducted the entropies of the polymer molecules , pure polymer molecules and the solvent molecules to reach the value for the entropy of mixing for polymer solvent system or polymer solution .
What we got , this is the final expression , we have received .
So , in this lecture , what we will do , we will get the expression for enthalpy of mixing .
So , once we get the enthalpy of mixing , we have to get the Gibbs free energy of mixing and once we get the final expression of the Gibbs free energy mixing , then we will look at the usefulness of the Flory - Huggins theory and what are the limitations or deficiencies in the Flory - Huggins theory and then , try to apply this Flory - Huggins theory in the dilute polymer solutions and get the concept of theta temperature .
Now , before we start getting the expression for enthalpy of mixing , just one point just to highlight that this is the expression we received or deduced for entropy of mixing for a polymer solvent .
Then phi i , which is the polymer fraction of the solvent molecule can be obtained from the number of moles .
This is the molar volume and this is total volume .
This is for the ith components .
So , we can write delta s m minus r v phi 1 .
We also know for ideal solution , in this polymer solution , we assume that the volume of mixture , there is no change in the volume compared to the original volume .
Now , what we trying here is to find out if there is , to define the size of polymers , which will have more solubility for a given solvent or if there are , if it is not a solvent , it is two polymers or two different size molecules , then how the entropy of mixing varies with the size of the molecules .
Now , we can divide each molecule , which is represented as i into the segments and one volume ; this is reference volume , which is the size of the individual cells in the 3D lattice .
Now , in case of solvent molecules , x i is 1 , so v i is the size of the solvent molecule .
For polymer , what we discussed is , x i is the number of polymer segment .
See , in this case , we are not mentioning solvent time now .
We are just , to make it general , we are using this expression .
So , we get from this delta s m equals to minus r v v 0 .
For if , say one was solvent , obviously x 1 is your 1 .
So , you will get back the same expression .
Now , what does this expression says that , if the size , if the size x 2 , the value of x 2 , if the value of x 2 goes up or the values of x goes up , then the size of the molecules is going up .
If the size goes up , the entropy of mixing comes down .
Now , what is the sign of this entropy of mixing of these things ?
This is the fraction .
Obviously , this is the negative term and there is a negative sign here , so this is a positive term .
Obviously , mixing has former general knowledge and general understanding that any mixing generally gives in increase in entropy .
So this entropy mixing is always positive .
Now , if the value of this x 1 or x 2 goes up , the value of entropy mixing goes down .
Which means that , a polymer having larger size , it will be , which will give less entropy of mixing compared to a polymer having a lower size for a given solvent in given condition .
So , for same temperature and pressure and same solvent , if you mix a polymer having same size , it will give lower entropy of mixing than a polymer which is having a lower size .
This is what it does .
So , solubilising larger size polymers are always difficult compared to lower size polymers at a given condition .
This is what it does .
Now , we will move on and try to find out the value of entropy of mixing .
Now , entropy , sorry , enthalpy of mixing .
Now , enthalpy of mixing is , as you see that , unlike one , where the ideal solution where this interaction , the solvent solvent , solute solute and the solute solvent interactions were having same interaction energy .
In this case , they could be different .
So , what we are writing this as , this is interaction energy psi 1 1 epsilon 2 2 and this is epsilon 1 2 .
When a polymer , new polymer , new polymer solvent contact is found , due to polymer getting dissolved in solvent , obviously it comes at the expense of solvent solvent contact and polymer polymer or segment segment contact .
So , we can write a expression like a chemical , pseudo - chemical energy , where half solvent solvent contact and half segment segment contact give 1 polymer solvent contact and we can also write the interaction energy power contact is the interaction energy for polymer solvent minus half of the interaction energy for the solvent solvent plus interaction energy for the segment segment .
Now , we know that del v m is 0 , so del h m will be given by q 1 2 .
This is the interaction energy power contact and q is the total number of polymer solvent contacts .
So , if q is the total number of polymer solvent contacts , then enthalpy of mixing will be given q multiplied by the interaction energy for each contact .
Now , one polymer has how many segments ?
One polymer chain has x segments and each segment is in , how many contacts solvent molecules ?
If you go back here , each polymer segment , if all of these are , say for argument , all these neighboring cells has solvent molecules , and then it will have z contacts .
One segment will have z polymer contacts ; next one will have z minus 1 contacts ; next one also z minus 1 contact .
So , except the two ends , each segment have z minus 1 contact .
So , each segment have z minus 1 contact .
Now , what is the chance that each of this vacant cells is a solvent molecule or each of this contacts is giving a polymer solvent contact , which is again given by the volume fraction of the solvent molecule because , its segment size and the size of a solvent molecule is same .
So , this would be given by the volume fraction .
So , the volume fraction of the solvent would be that , forbidding that , each segment or each neighborhood has a solvent molecule .
So , that is , what is the chance that each segment would be giving up a polymer solvent contact .
Now , this is any , just this is not 1 .
Each segment ’ s intermediate actually has z minus 2 , one this side and one this side .
So , they have z minus 2 contact .
Each segment has z minus two 2 , with a neighboring cell other than a polymer .
So , if you consider this segment , it has z minus 2 contacts with other than polymer .
Now , what is the chance that the other cells are solvent molecules ?
These have to be multiplied by solvent mono - fraction .
You can add 2 extra for the two ends , which is z being high , I can just write , we can ignore the two ends and write this .
So , this is each segment having this many polymer solvent contact .
Each polymer has x segment .
So , each polymer has how many contacts ?
x z minus 2 .
So , each polymer has these many contacts with solvents .
So , total number of polymer solvent contacts , q would be , n 2 is the number of molecules , polymer molecules x , z minus 2 phi 1 .
So , now let us do some maths .
phi 1 is given by n 1 n 1 plus x n 2 .
Phi 2 is given by x n 2 n 1 plus x n 2 .
This gives phi 1 x n 2 is n 1 phi 2 .
So , I can write this q , instead of phi 1 x n 2 phi 1 x n 2 , I can write z minus 2 n 1 phi 2 .
So , this gives the total number of contacts q .
So , what will be del h mixture ?
It will be q multiplied by 1 2 .
This should be z minus 2 n 1 phi 2 .
Now , to remove these terms , which is a little abstract , is the number of coordination number in the lattice .
We already defined a term interaction , Flory - Huggins polymer solvent interaction , parameter chi was defined as z minus 2 k T .
k is the Boltzmann constant and t is the absolute temperature .
This chi is a temperature dependent dimensionless quantity , which is just defined like this to remove all the information from the lattice .
So , we can write del h m is chi n 1 phi 2 into k T .
So , this is the expression for the .
We will come back and look at little more deep on the polymer solvent interaction .
Parameter is basically gives you the difference when a solvent molecule is taken out from a solvent environment and put in a polymer environment .
So , that is the , I guess the interaction energy between a polymer and a solvent and we named as a Flory - Huggins polymer solvent interaction parameter .
So , that gives our enthalpy of mixing .
So , if we just go back and see what we have seen , now we know the entropy of mixing of a polymer solution and polymer plus solvent is truly , now in this case , the entropy is truly a combinatorial entropy .
Remember , we have only calculated this entropy and the number of ways you can arrange the polymer in the three lattice .
So , it is a only configuration or combinatorial entropy .
No other entropy is involved in this case .
Now , we calculated the entropy or the enthalpy of mixing as k t , this is mentioned here and you can replace like this also .
So , you can write Gibbs free energy mixing of polymer solution by this .
This is given .
Now , one thing you must ask wondering that , why should you use a lattice like this .
Is this justifiable ?
In case of a pure liquid or a pure solvent or pure solution , the molecules are very regular , you know , quite regular , so that , we can use such a 3D lattice .
As we have seen that or you know the place of the molecules in the first neighbor , in a solution or in a liquid is quite established , whereas the place of the second neighbor and third neighbor and so on , it will become uncertain .
As we have seen that , in deriving this expression or against expression , only we are interested in the first neighbor .
So , this type of model , 3D lattice model is quite justifiable .
So , this expression is which we derived using 3D lattice model should be quite justifiable .
Now , this is known as Flory - Huggins equation as you might have known by now .
So , just rewrite this .
I am breaking into two terms .
This term , as we , this is again .
We have so far seen that the performance of idealized continuous flow immobilized enzyme reactors depends primarily on the reaction kinetics and the basic assumption for idealized reactors was that the immobilized enzyme preparation does not experience any mass transfer or partitioning effects .
The immobilized enzymes experience in addition to the catalytic activity three major external effects during immobilization .
One is the conformational changes as a result of which the basic turn over number of the enzyme might be altered ; even the value of Michaelis Menten constant may also be altered .
The other effect is partitioning of substrate and product which also results in alteration in the Km value of the enzyme reaction .
Then the third effect was mass transfer of substrate and product and this mass transfer as we noticed was at two levels .
Or in a very broader sense if you consider the reaction in immobilized enzyme reactor it will imply that in addition to the biochemical reaction there will be four more resistances involved .
One will be transport of the substrate from the bulk to the surface ; from surface the substrate has to transport to the site of the enzymatic reaction which means the enzyme molecules that are located throughout the immobilized enzyme particle and then the reverse process that means the product produced as a result of biochemical reaction has to transport back from the carrier interior to the surface .
Therefore the two major matrices which provide resistance to the over all reaction is the thin film around the immobilized enzyme particle and the whole matrix itself and the pores in which the immobilized enzyme is distributed .
I think you will also recall what we had seen earlier ; the diagram in which you have a thin film , a stationary film around the particle .
This film thickness will depend on various physical properties of the fluid .
Then you have enzyme distributed all over the pores in the particle and the substrate has to transport from the surface to those materials and similarly reverse .
Thus the product has to come back from the reaction site to the surface and then to the bulk .
I like you to have a look at the substrate gradient .
If you consider that this regime is the thin film then from the bulk there might be a linear substrate gradient across the thin film and the concentration might drop at the surface and from the surface to the interior of the particle that means to center of the particle there might be again a gradient as a result of biochemical reaction .
Because the substrate will be consumed and as the substrate progresses through the particle depth the concentration will be dropping down and there are two possibilities .
One is that you have a rather more convenient situation that from here the substrate concentration goes like a profile like this which is more favorable in the sense that around the whole particle there is some substrate available for biochemical reaction to take place .
On the other hand it can also happen that the substrate concentration drops to zero earlier than the substrate has reached to the middle point and therefore this portion which is highlighted here is deprived of the substrate and the overall reaction rate that is observed apparently is much smaller .
There might be coupled partitioning effects as I have shown in the lower figures in the gradient lower but basically these are the three major issues : biochemical reaction , external film diffusion and internal pore diffusion that are encountered in the case of an immobilized enzyme reactor which need to be considered while we consider the reactor performance .
Although in the idealized reactor performance we have not taken into account but in the actual reactors they need to be taken care while analyzing the steady state reactor performance .
An important feature of the performance of immobilized enzyme reactor is that one needs to identify the limiting rate , the step which has a limiting rate the lowest reaction rate .
That means a comparison between the biochemical reaction rate and the rate of diffusion by the Ö .
film diffusion or the pore diffusion .
One must be able to identify by some analytical method or experimental method that which is the rate limiting step and we must analyze or design our reactor keeping in view the rate limiting step .
Consider that we have an immobilized enzyme preparation with a very high enzyme loading .
That means the preparation is highly reactive , the rate of reaction can be very high and the rate of diffusion is slow either because of the Ö. .. of the substrate or the chemical nature of the matrix .
If the rate of diffusion is slow in that case the diffusion will become rate limiting .
If the difference between the rate of diffusion and the rate of biochemical reaction are too large then one of them will be the controlling factor and the whole reactor design must be based on that particular step .
Alternatively if you take an immobilized enzyme preparation to be very lean loading that means the loading is very low and the catalyst is not very reactive or alternatively the enzyme Ö .
that turn over number is very low and the rate of diffusion is very fast .
In that case diffusion effectively will not play a key role in the reactor design and the reactor design can be easily taken care by idealized reactor performance considering the reaction kinetics in picture .
Based on these three parameters particularly as I mentioned earlier the conformational changes , mass transfer effects and the partitioning effects , the kinetic parameters for immobilized enzyme are classified into three major classes .
One is intrinsic parameters which are the same as that of soluble enzyme which means no partitioning in a soluble system , no mass transfer limitations ; the sole parameter is the reaction rate and they are called the intrinsic parameters .
If we consider the rate expression our classical rate expression v = k2E0S / Km + S will apply to the situation .
The second class of the kinetic parameters is defined as inherent parameter .
Inherent kinetic parameters are those which are obtained as a result of conformational changes only .
That means they are dependent on the method of immobilization .
That means the kind of reactants we have used in immobilization , the kind of matrix we have used in immobilization and whatever the interaction between the matrix and the enzyme under the conditions of immobilization , whatever conformational changes have taken place , whatever kinetic parameters have been modified as a result of this interaction are considered in the inherent parameters and we define them as ví = kí2E0S / Kím + S The parameters are just given prime and the inherent parameters have no role to play or not much can be done during the reactor design or reactor operation .
They are the final property of the immobilized enzyme , kinetic property .
I must again clearly stress that the inherent parameters do not consider the diffusional effects or the partitioning effects .
That means if the system has no partitioning behavior or no diffusional limitations ; diffusion will be there because there is a phase difference .
But if the diffusion is not the rate limiting step or rather it is quite fast compared to the reaction rate the inherent parameters will be useful .
On the other hand in case the mass transfer effects are very severe they can be totally rate limiting steps .
That means the whole rate of reaction is controlled by the rate of diffusion .
Biochemical reaction is very fast and the rate of diffusion is slow .
The rates may not be absolutely very far apart if the two are very comparable in that case we need to consider our apparent reaction velocity as equal to vapp = kí2E0S / Kappm + S Here when we say that the apparent parameters are those which can be modified , which can be taken care by reactor operation .
That means as I mentioned some time earlier that the thickness of the film can be controlled by either increased linear flow velocity in the case of packed bed reactor or by increasing the agitation speed in the case of CSTR .
Similarly on the other hand the internal flow diffusion also can be regulated by controlling the particle size .
That means the distance of transport of the substrate into the immobilized enzyme particle is minimized or reduced .
Therefore the substrate will be available all across the particle and thus can be modified .
Therefore they are called apparent parameters and in all possible analysis we must be interested in the apparent parameters , Kappm .
That will dictate if you want to consider diffusional limitations also as a part of our analysis .
The Kappm has been a parameter which people have tried to define ; quantitatively what are the parameters which can define the Km apparent and one of the most acceptable definitions of Kappm can be Kappm = Kím / PF where P is the partitioning coefficient that is concentration of the substrate in solid phase divided by concentration of the substrate in the bulk phase that is the bulk liquid .
On the other hand F is equal to tanh ?
l / ?
l where ?
is the ratio of the kinetic parameters to the diffusional parameters which is defined as ?
= Ω [ kí2ES / D.Kím ] 1 / 2 If you see here in this expression kí2ES instead of writing S0 I am writing Es .
That means enzyme concentration in the solid phase and not the E0 because as a result of conformational changes the enzyme concentration interms of activity can get altered .
D is the molecular diffusivity and kím is the Km value of the enzyme taking into account the conformational changes .
The unique part is the parameter P is a fixed parameter and depends on the chemical nature of the substrate and the matrix .
Once the method of immobilization is fixed , the immobilized preparation is fixed the value of P is fixed .
It behaves almost like a constant parameter .
Once the method of immobilization , the nature of the matrix and the substrate are defined the value of P will remain constant and the value of Kappm is dictated by the parameter F and in the case of F what we call as a Thiele function , the form of F is very significant and this can be considered to have a very unique profile .
If you consider this function F that is tanh ?
l / ?
l , the characteristics of this function is that when ?
l is less than one that means in this region , the value of F is approximately equal to one .
On the other hand when you go at ?
l value greater than two F is approximately 1 / ?
l . When you say F is equal to one , there is no effect on the kinetic parameter Km or there is no diffusional limitation in other words .
The Km is not altered as a result of mass transfer , diffusion .
F is equal to one and as we defined earlier Kappm was equal to Kím / PF and P we have considered as a constant parameter as far as the immobilized enzyme preparation is concerned and the diffusion does not play a controlling role here if F is equal to one .
On the other hand when the ?
l becomes higher than two the value of F is 1 / ?
l or it implies that Kappm will be equal to Kím. ?
l / P and therefore the value of Kappm gets altered by a factor of ?
l . ìlî is the characteristic dimension of the immobilized particle .
If it is a thin film it can be thickness of the film ; if itís a spherical bead it can be diameter of the bead or any characteristics parameter l may be defined as .
Yes only inherent kinetic constant and Ö.. ... When we assume that ?
l is less than one F is approximately equal to one , no diffusion control .
If you just consider the definition of ?
l ? l = l / 2 [ kí2ES / D.Kím ] 1 / 2 This is ?
l . Under what conditions ?
l will be less than one or a smaller value ?
The very condition can be taken from these various parameters .
When l is small that means it is a very thin film or very small diameter particles , the value of Kappm will approach to that of Kím and there will be no diffusion control and under ideal condition l is equal to zero for soluble enzyme .
So under that condition there will be no diffusion control .
Second is D is large .
If the rate of diffusion or molecular diffusivity is very high also ?
l will be small and therefore also there will be no diffusion control .
Third is Es is small which means low enzyme loading in the matrix .
If immobilized enzyme preparation has a small loading the diffusional resistances will not be very controlling .
The fourth thing is that the ratio of Kí2 / Kím which you will recall from the basic definition of this parameter which is specificity constant or a pseudo first order rate constant for the enzyme catalyzed reaction Kí2 / Kím is small which refers to slow catalysis .
That means catalyst is very slow ; itís turn over number is very low .
kí2 is the turn over number and if the catalyst is slow then also the diffusional limitations will be negligible .
Considering these parameters one can design the immobilization enzyme preparation also in such a way that diffusion limitations are not there .
It is always desirable but that is one of the reasons why we call this kinetic parameters apparent parameters .
That means they are neither intrinsic nor inherent but they are just apparent and they can be modified if you design your system in a way that you can have a very low enzyme loading to the extent that the overall rate of the enzyme catalyzed reaction is smaller than the rate of diffusion .
The diffusional limitations are wiped out straight away or if you take a smaller particle you can get rid of diffusion .
We are considering this parameter the ?
l . If the ?
l is less than one or smaller value then the magnitude of F is approximately one ; no diffusional limitations .
? l will be small when the ES will be small and ES is the enzyme concentration in the matrix in the solid phase , which is the enzyme loading .
Physical interpretation of ?
l is the ratio between the biochemical parameters and the diffusional parameters .
In the numerator you have k2 and ES .
Both are related to biochemical reaction .
On the denominator you have D .
k2 / Km is a combined parameter for the biocatalysis but D is a diffusional parameter so it is physically some parameter which defines the ratio between the two and by adjusting either numerator or increasing or decreasing the numerator or the denominator one can regulate the controlling parameter .
If you look at higher value of ?
l , when ?
l is greater than two F is equal to 1 / ?
l by basic definitions and therefore F is usually less than 1 .
It is inverse of ?
l and therefore F is less than one which means the reaction is under diffusional control regime .
When ? l magnitude is greater than two you can safely take that the reaction is diffusional limited and Kappm equal to Kappm = Kím .
? l / P This means Kappm increases by a magnitude of ?
l . What are the experimental or analytical ways by which we can experimentally determine the rate limiting step ; whether diffusion is rate limiting or not .
Various approaches can be adopted .
Consider zero order regime .
That means at high substrate concentration when you are talking of ?
l less than one that means a thin flies or smaller particles reaction rate of the immobilized enzyme will be proportional to enzyme loading .
If you make different preparation with different enzyme loadings the reaction rate will be proportional to the enzyme loading .
That means as you increase the enzyme loading the reaction rate will also increase .
But at low substrate concentration , for ?
l less than one and F is equal to one the reaction velocity of immobilized enzyme will become equal to vIME = kí2 P.F.S.ES / Kím That means in the first order regime if you substitute in this parameter Kappm = Kím / PF you get such an expression where F is equal to zero at ?
l less than one and v mobilized will be proportional to ES.S .
Because this is constant , this is constant .
P we are considering as a constant .
F is one .
So the v immobilized becomes proportional to S.ES , if you consider the low substrate concentration and at a small thickness of particles and ?
l is less than one .
In the same case if you take ?
l greater than two Kappm is Kappm = Kím .
? l / P If you substitute for v immobilized enzyme you get vIME = kí2 / Kappm .S.ES That means a first order kinetics .
We are talking of low substrate concentration .
? l is greater than two that means the value of F is 1 / ?
l . Under that condition if you substitute the various terms v immobilized enzyme preparation will be proportional to ES1 / 2 .
If you substitute here the value of gamma here you will get E1 / 2 .
That means the enzyme reaction rate will not be proportional to the enzyme concentration in the particle but will be proportional to the square root of the enzyme concentration in the particle .
In the case of immobilized enzyme systems which have no diffusional limitations the rate of reaction is proportional to enzyme loading and which is the usual understanding even for soluble enzyme .
Up to a concentration range the rate of reaction is proportional to the enzyme concentration .
But on the other hand when the immobilized enzyme preparation is controlled by diffusion , that relationship does not hold good .
That means if you make a plot between ln v = 1 / 2ln ES you will get a linear fit and that can be checked experimentally by making preparations of different enzyme loadings and merge in them enzyme reaction Ö. .. .
. That is one approach by which one can monitor or determine the concentration of the controlling parameter in the case of immobilized enzyme reaction .
Or in other words as ?
l will increase from a small to large value either in thickness or in enzyme loading , behavior will change .
Such an experiment can be even monitored .
Either you increase the thickness of the particle or increase the enzyme loading .
You can see the change in the behavior on the relationship between the enzyme loading and the enzyme reaction rate .
That can give you an indication of the controlling parameter .
Another way is to look at the Lineweaver - Burk plot .
In the case of a classical enzyme catalyzed system we have 1 / v Vs 1 / S .
When we are talking of S , we are talking of Sbulk because we are not monitoring the concentration of the substrate inside the reactor but we are concentrating on 1 / Sb .
Normally we will get such a behavior where slope will be Kím / vím or Kí2E0 .
But in the case of immobilized enzyme preparation which are regulated by diffusional limitations the curve usually convex to the 1 / S axis .
That means it will be something like this , where the slope is Kappm / vím .
By plotting the Lineweaver Burk plot for immobilized enzyme preparation one can also identify the extent of diffusional limitations because then the Kappm drastically changes .
When you do the Kappm , partitioning is fixed , the value of F can be noticed and F can give you a value of ?
l . So in that way also one can determine .
One of the reference which has analyzed the diffusional limitations is given by Reagon and associates in Biotech Bioengineering , 16 .
1081 , 1974 .
In fact one of the earlier references in mass transfer analysis of an immobilized glucose oxidase particles was made and is given in this .
The third approach of analyzing the diffusional limitation is on the basis of activation energy .
To illustrate my point I think I like to make you familiar with one of the experimental data which was reported .
This is ln v verses 1 / T for acetyl choline esterase immobilized in polyacrlyamide gel particles .
When the estimation of activation energy was made under different substrate concentration regimes and with immobilized particles , one noticed a profile something like a biphasic profile .
That means the activation energy got changed .
Consider another situation in which at the low substrate concentration when ?
l is greater than two when diffusional control was established , the energy of activation noted was ?
E * which was equal to 5.7kcal / mole .
On the other hand at high substrate concentration , when ?
l was high one gets the same kind of energy of activation at high temperatures .
At high temperatures these similar activation energy was obtained even at high substrate concentration as in the case of low substrate concentration because at high temperatures the reaction rate was high .
The reaction rate being high , the diffusion became limiting .
The activation energy behaviour was almost similar as in the case of low substrate and at high ?
l which was established parameters for diffusional limitations .
The right hand side profile , a straight line profile refers to a thick particle where the thickness is high ; ?
l is greater than two and at low substrate concentration .
We know under these conditions the system will be diffusional limited and the activation energy computed in this case was 5.7 kcal / mole .
When you go over to high substrate concentration over the range of substrate , over the range of temperature initially at high temperature range almost a similar activation energy was obtained 5.7 .
That means the system behaves almost like diffusional limited even at high substrate concentration which it should not .
At high substrate concentration the system should not behave as a diffusion limited system because at higher temperatures the reaction rate is higher and the diffusional limitation was established .
On the other hand when the temperature was reduced the system became diffusional unlimited and the activation energy was much higher , which was 9.4 kcal / mole .
So a change in the activation energy over a range of temperature also indicates the diffusional limitation behavior .
Therefore we have three distinct approaches to monitor by experimental methods the effect of diffusional limitation in the case of immobilized enzyme particles .
One is by seeing the effect of enzyme loading on the reaction rate that means itís proportionality to the enzyme loading changes from linear to proportional to the power half .
The second is the nature of the Lineweaver Burk plot which becomes convex to the 1 / S in X - axis which means that the enzyme is more sensitive to diffusional limitations at lower substrate concentration .
At higher substrate concentration the profile is more or less linear .
But as it increases to higher substrate concentration the slope tends to increase and the Kappm value increases .
The third is the estimation of activation energy over a range of temperature .
By the experimental reactor operations in the laboratory many people have noticed that diffusional limitations play a key role either by varying the agitation speed in the case of a CSTR or by the varying the linear flow velocity in the case of PFR , the rate of reaction can be improved and so diffusional limitations can be overcome if any .
The question is how to analyze a practical situation .
That means if suppose you want to know how we can determine the actual value of the mass transfer coefficient .
In that case before we go to a total mass transfer a closed box picture of diffusion we can break it into the external film diffusion and internal pore diffusion and look them separately and check if they can be analyzed along with the chemical reaction under steady state behavior because even the enzyme reactor that we have looked at are to be analyzed under steady state situation .
If you look at immobilized enzyme reactor performance with external film diffusion that means the substrate may be very thick .
There is a thick film of substrate around the immobilized enzyme particle which will cause a substrate gradient across the film and therefore the concentration of the substrate at the surface of the immobilized enzyme particle is not same as in the bulk .
Ideal situation could be to consider a non - porous particle , where all the enzyme will be on the surface and the sole diffusional limitation is as a result of transport through the thin film .
One of the empirical methods to determine the Kappm apparent was given as Kappm = Kím + kí2 E0d / D Purely an empirical solution to describe the problem .
That means the Kappm will be dependent on the thickness of the film .
Logical because of the thickness the mass transfer tends to be more .
Then D is inversely proportional to the rate of the diffusion ; that is also quite obvious .
Now the problem is that experimental measurement of the film thickness is not an easy task .
One cannot really , for any immobilized enzyme reactor , measure the film thickness and then make a design computation .
So therefore an alternative analytical method has to be chosen and if you look at analytical methods the best way is to look under steady state reactor performance .
Let us say you have an immobilized enzyme particle which is non - porous in nature .
All the enzyme is immobilized on the surface , a typical particle on which enzyme is only on the surface .
There is a layer of film through which the substrate has to diffuse to reach to the enzyme active site and as a result of this there is a concentration gradient .
For simplicity one can assume a linear gradient and so therefore rate of mass transfer here will be equal to rm = klam ( Sb - Ss ) This is Sb ; this is Ss .
That is the concentration gradient .
The rate of diffusion in such a situation let us assume the situation that this non - porous particle is packed in packed bed reactor and we operate it till a steady state is reached ; steady state reached means the concentration of the substrate at the exit end becomes constant with time .
The fractional conversion becomes constant with time .
The reactor performance is under steady state which would mean that the rate of reaction and rate of diffusion are same .
Rate of mass transfer , rate of reaction are identical .
So rate of mass transfer is klam .
Thatís the mass transfer coefficient .
am is the area of the mass transfer which is described as area cm2 / cm3 ; that means the surface area per unit volume of the particle .
kl is the mass transfer coefficient cm / sec .
So overall klam will have unit of per second .
A typical first order rate constant .
Sb - Ss is the concentration gradient across the thin film .
This under steady state conditions must be same as the rate of a reaction and that is v = kí2E0SS / Kím + SS If you substitute the magnitude of the Ss from this expression and simplify you get kí2E0 [ Sb - ví / klam ] ví = Kím + [ Sb - ví / klam ] The steady state rate of reaction will be given by this expression and the Ss will be equal to Sb - Rn or ví / klam and therefore and 1 / ví will be equal to 1 / ví = Kím / kí2E0 ( 1 / Sb - ví / klam ) + 1 / kí2E0 That gives you the 1 / ví If you consider the extreme conditions , that is when Sb is very high or we are considering zero order regime .
From this expression you can get 1 / ví = Kím / kí2E0 .1 / Sb + 1 / kí2E0 In the case of very high substrate concentration in a zero order regime .
On the other hand when Sb is very small or a first order regime , if you look at the this equation from here you get ví = kí2E0 / Kím ( Sb - ví / klam ) or if you simplify and take all the ví term onto the left hand side you will get kí2E0 klam.Sb ví = Kím klam + kí2E0 You can simplify or 1 / ví for small Sb will be equal to 1 Kím 1 ví = ( + ) .
klam kí2E0 Sb We have two different conditions of the Lineweaver Burk plot ; one in the case where Sb is very high and the Lineweaver Burk plot will have the slope as Kím / Vím On the other hand when the substrate concentration is very low the slope will be 1 / klam + Kím / Vím .
Or in other words you consider two in graphical form .
You will get something like this ; almost a typical profile as we discussed earlier that it becomes convex to 1 / Sb ; 1 / ví .
The slope of this straight line will be , at low substrate concentration , 1 / klam + Kím / kí2E0 .
On the other hand the slope here will be Kím / kí2E0 .
By knowing the two slopes one can calculate klam .
The difference between the two slopes is the 1 / klam .
So one can experimentally determine the magnitude of klam by carrying out the immobilized enzyme reaction in a continuous reactor and getting the steady state performance of the klam and from that Kím and k2E0 and once you know klam you also know the substrate concentration gradient Sb - Ss by the first equation where you have related the rate of mass transfer because that is klam. ( Sb - Ss ) .
Rate of reaction and the mass transfer rate are identical under steady state situation and therefore they can be experimentally determined and one can then take the parameter which takes into account the immobilized enzyme reactor performance incorporating the external film diffusion .
In this case we have only considered the external film diffusion ; on the other hand actual reactor may also involve , if it is porous particle general pore diffusion also .
Such an analysis is applicable only for non - porous particles or in case particle size is very small where the pore diffusional limitations are to be taken as negligible and we will continue with that in subsequent classes .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry and this eighteenth lecture , we will continue our discussion on ionic chain polymerization .
And in this project we will discuss the leftover discussion on the termination reaction in cationic chain polymerization .
We will also discuss the kinetics and energetics of cationic chain polymerization and then move to anionic chain polymerization talk about the features of anionic polymerization , and then like the cationic chain polymerization talk about different ways of initiation and propagation and termination reactions .
And briefly we will touch upon the energetics of this anionic chain polymerization , and then in the end we will talk about this , a few practical considerations for anionic chain polymerization , both cationic and anionic .
Now , let us just quickly recap what we covered in last lecture on ionic chain polymerization .
We talked about general features of all the characteristics of ionic chain polymerization and its comparison with radical polymerization .
We talked about selectivity of the monomers with about the importance of solvent polarity in case of ionic polymerization .
We talked about the nature reaction is very fast reaction and we also talked about the inherent difference in the termination reaction between radical chain polymerization and ionic chain polymerization .
We talked about cationic chain polymerization in particular detail where we talked about different types of initiation reactions and then propagation .
And we just initiated discussion on termination and as we discussed , that in case of both cationic and anionic , polymerization is bimolecular , bimolecular reactions between these propagating species is , so termination is not that , done that way .
Typically , the terminations happen or typical termination happens in by the chain transfer and there are several possibilities of chain transfer reaction in case of cationic chain polymerization .
And we just started giving examples , which chain transfer with monomeric species and what we will do .
We will just begin our discussion in this lecture from that page .
We were discussing in this last lecture the termination by beta proton transfer to different species and we gave examples of the transfer reaction with monomer .
And just note the rate constant we are giving and with the same rate constant , the same notation , what we used for radical chain polymerization , k tr M I .
just said , that there could be two possible double bond in case of this monomers , like isobutylene , alpha methyl styrene .
But for the examples , monomers like styrene , it will be only one double bond possible because in case of styrene you have only one possibilities of beta transfer .
Now , let us talk about other possibilities .
In this case we talked about chain transfer to counter ion .
And these , these are basically similar as in the case of transfer to monomers , so I am just going through quickly these different types of chain transfer .
Here , the proton is transferred to the counter ion itself .
So , you get a dead polymer class species as in the case of the transfer to the monomer .
And in , like in monomer case , the resulting species out of or as a result of chain transfer reaction is same as the initiating species .
You remember , if you recall this initiating species for this reaction of polymerization of isobutylene by BF 3 plus water , this was the initiating species .
So , what happened is , in spite of this chain transfer reaction , the rate of polymerization does not slow down because this has the same reactivity with the existing kinetic chain , only thing happens because of this chain termination , chain transfer , the molecular weight actually gets reduced .
Similarly , in this case , this can again reinitiate a cationic polymerization .
So , rate does not get influenced much , whereas the molecular weight get drops .
And this is again using the same examples , the chain transfer to counter ion .
Chain transfer to polymer is possible and for example , this is the styrene polymerization , cationic polymerization .
In this case , intra - molecular photon transfer is possible , which actually gives you a dead polymer chain and again initiated to coinitiator complex and if inter - molecular chain transfer happen , chain transfer to polymer happens , then you get a branched , branched chain or you get branched , branched polymer .
So , this is very similar to reactions we have discussed in case of chain radical chain polymerization .
Chain transfer also can be possible to the other substance , whether it is present as in impurities or you have added deliberately as a chain transfer agent to control the molecular weight .
For example , this is generic structure of the chain transfer agent , which could be water , alcohols , esters , acids or anhydride , etcetera .
And it can participate in the chain transfer reaction and giving away new catalyst , cocatalyst complex , which again can reinitiate a cationic chain polymerization .
So , again this reduces the molecular weight of the cationic chain polymerization .
Now , there is one more termination is possible , which is not a transfer reaction , which is basically in true sense , which is a termination reaction where this counter ion and this ionic species , the cationic properties can species combine into to form a covalent ball .
For example , for generic expression we are using , it can be , it can be shown here and the examples of isopropylene polymerization will be in water , you can write a termination reaction like this .
Now , in this case it is a true termination reaction because here you are not forming anything else , we can restart the , or reinitiate the polymerization .
As you know , in absence of water this cannot initiate the chain by itself .
So , this is in that sense not a transfer reaction and it is a true sense a termination reaction , and you can just note down the example of this termination reaction .
Now , there could be some agents , reagents present , like in case of radical chain polymerizations where this reagent actually can slow down the cationic chain polymerization considerably .
So , they can act as inhibitor or retarder in case of cationic chain polymerization , like we talked about different retarder or inhibitor , like in case of radical chain polymerization .
In this case also there could be other reagents possible , which you , if you add or present are as impurities , it can retard or inhibit the chain polymerization , cationic chain polymerization .
For examples , amines , triaryls , trialkyl phosphates , triophenes , they can actually act as inhibitor .
For example , you take specific example of amines , they can react with this propagating species and form a complex , such in this case this cationic species is very stable and they are nonreactive towards the monomer .
So , once this is formed , this cannot reinitiate or this cannot actually take part in further propagation reactions , which means , this chain actually gets inhibited by this type of reaction .
So , like radical chain polymerization there are molecules or reagents , which you can or may be undesirably they are present in they can be present in cationic chain polymerization .
So , we just talked about different possible possibilities of initiation reaction , propagation reactions and types of termination reactions possible in case of cationic chain polymerization .
Now , let us talk about the kinetics of or get some , introduce kinetic expression in case of cationic chain polymerization .
Again , we will consider , like I said , we consider , consider the most important example of the initiation reaction and we consider the generic expression… minus , and so these are the two steps consist , you know , make the initiation reactions .
As I mentioned earlier , that this is your rate determining step , so the rate constant for this reaction is considered .
See , if I write expression for rate of initiation , it would be ki , concentration of this species , Y plus IZ minus and concentration of monomer .
As I mentioned earlier , that here in the rate expression for initiation reactions this monomer is appearing where in case of radical chain polymerization , monomers was not present in terms of , in the rate expression of the initiation reaction .
Now , if you get the value for this form this equilibrium , we can write ki I YZ M .
Let us write the propagation step , write this generic expression .
So , rate of polymerization , R p , is given by k p , concentration of… And the monomer .
Termination reactions , now let us consider the true termination reaction , which is the combination of the cationic propagating species with the counter ion .
We are not considering for this kinetic expression , the other time transfer reaction , so we can write k t IZ .
So , R t , rate of termination is given by the concentration of… Now , for simplicity just write , like the earlier case where in case of radical polymerization let us write this only , M plus… So , this is the summation of concentration of all the cationic species present in the reaction medium , M 1 , M 2 , M 3 and so on .
So , for simplicity we are just writing , omitting this subscript and writing this M plus .
Again , this is the summation of the concentration of all the cationic species , propagating species present in the medium .
Now , at steady state you can equate R i n R t to get the concentrate , concentration of… like , in case of , we have a similar approach in case of radical chain polymerization , so we get this .
So , R p similarly can be obtained in k p I YZ .
Here , the rate of polymerization depend on the square of this monomer concentration where in case of radical polymerization , if you remember , is the , it was related to the concentration of monomer .
That is because this monomer is appearing in the rate expression of the initiation reaction , as well in ionic polymerization , whether in the case of radical polymerization this monomer was absent in the initiation reaction .
So , I can write the degree of polymerization , like R p by R t , which gives k p M by k t .
Now , similarly , transfer reactions happen , I can write X n R p plus summation of all the chain terminating reactions .
So , R ts plus R transfer monomer plus R transfer solvent and so on .
So , we can just simply write X n as k p M k t k ts chain transfer to the counter ion , chain transfer to the monomer and chain transfer to the solvent or any other substance or you can add , if they are other chain transfer reactions present .
So , similarly , like in case of chain polymerization we can write this expression .
This is X n bar 0 is the degree , number of degrees of polymerization , absence of any chain transfer reaction .
So , if if only transfer possible to monomer , then you can write X n bar is plus C M .
So , the more the transfer reaction , obviously , the average degrees of polymerization comes down so as same , same discussion you can have what we had for the reaction , chain radical polymerization .
So , increasing the solvent concentration , which is taking part in the chain transfer reaction or increasing the monomer concentration or similar , similar thing , we can describe exactly like the chain transfer reactions for radical polymerization .
So , let us talk about the energetic , which means , that the effect of the temperature on the reaction rate and molecular weight , like in case of radical polymerization if you just recollect this , this is the expression for your R p , rate of polymerization , and this is the expression for your average degrees of polymerization .
So , we can write , similarly activation energy for reaction E i , initiation , plus E propagation minus termination and E X n bar 0 in absence of any chain transfer rate reagent we can write this .
Now , typically in case of cationic polymerization both E i and E p are lower than the termination activation energy as can be justified because that bimolecular termination is not possible and E p values are typically for minus 20 to 40 kilojoule per mole , which also depends on the monomer structure for same monomers .
It , the activation general propagation will of course , depends on the initiator or coinitiator and the solvent .
For example , thus , lets , this E p values is around no E p around , comes around , say 22 .
Let us go back and this E r value , it can be positive or negative and values is typically from minus 20 to 40 kilo joule per mole .
So , if I want to find out the defect of rate of cationic chain polymerization with temperature we get this E R like R t case and depending upon the value or sign of E R you can tell whether the reaction rate will increase with temperature or not .
If this E R is negative , then R p goes up with temperature goes down ; if it is positive , then R p goes up with increasing temperature .
Now , do not confuse , that activation energy for reaction is negative .
No single reaction cannot , no single reaction can have negative activation energy .
The activation energy for reaction in cationic chain polymerization could be negative , that is because it is a combination of activation energy for initiation , propagation and termination reaction .
If that activation energy for the termination is higher than the combination of activation energy of initiation plus propagation , then it will become negative , so the rate increases with the temperature .
If this is negative , if it is positive , then the rate of reaction increases with the temperature .
Similarly , you can write the expression for the molecular weight X n 0 in absence of chain termination reaction .
Now , as we just said , that E P is less than E t , most cases , most general cases , so this is negative , which means , that X n 0 goes up with decrease in temperature .
So , the molecular weight always decreases , sorry , molecular weight always goes up .
If you decrease the temperature of the reaction , that is why cationic polymerization .
But any chain polymerization in most cases performed in a environment or sub - zero temperature .
Now , if you consider this chain transfer reaction or chain transfer constant , C is , say for chain transfer to the monomer is given by k tr is this d ln C by dT is given by E tr minus E p is divided by R T square .
Now , typically E transfer is higher than E p , so which means , that with T , with increase in , decrease in temperature C also goes down , which means , X n goes up .
So , we found , that even for the reactions where transfer reaction is absent , if we decrease temperature the molecular weight goes up .
The cases where transfer reaction present , the transfer constant goes down with decrease in temperature , as a result , that molecular weight goes up .
So , for cationic chain polymerization , no matter whether chain transfer reaction is present or not , you always end up having higher molecular weight .
If you decrease the temperature , now whether that also simultaneously increases the rate of the polymerization that depends on the value of the activation energy for reactions .
If it is negative , then with decreasing temperature you get increase in polymerization rate , but if it positive , then with decrease in temperature you get reduction in the polymerization rate .
Now , if we can , if you can do reactions where you do not have these side reactions or this chain transfer reaction , then you can keep this propagating cations , cationic propagating chains alive and you can get living cationic polymerization .
Now , we are not going to details about the living cationic polymerization in this course , but there are , though it is very difficult in case of cationic polymerization , in , in a very careful manner if you can do reactions where you reduce or minimize the chain transfer reaction and the side reactions , then there is a possibility , that you can get a living chain polymerization .
Now , this cationic chain polymerization can be utilized to synthesize telechelic polymers as well , where telechelic term means , low molecular weight , typically less than 20K molecular weight with a functional group at end , which can be utilized for further reaction .
For example , we take this reaction , general reaction .
So , you can consider these , reactions of this with isobutylene and you get propagating chain like this , which can again react with alkyl halide .
You know now , this chloride can be utilized , reacted to form several types of groups , say like NCO or CH 2 H or group or something like that .
So , by this way you can , you can terminate a cationic chain polymers with a desired molecule , in this case alkly halide , and you can make functional groups at the end , which you can utilize to form different functional groups and then for the reactions impossible in that functional groups .
Sometimes in cationic polymerization you also , if you do a characterization of the polymers you gained at the end of cationic chain polymerization you might get or you might see there is a bimodel distribution on the molecular weight .
Now , in that case what might had happened , that there could be possibility of simultaneously present of two different types of this ionic associated counterions .
And as we know , that the reactivities of the free counterions or the solvent separated counterions are much different than tight iron - pairs .
If they are present in significant amount , then they will propagate in a different way that might lead to different , differentiate of molecular weights , which might results in a bimodal type distribution of these resulting polymers .
Now , what are the practical considerations in case of , say , cationic chain polymerization ?
For a successful cationic chain polymerization , as we just discussed , usually done , usually done at a temperature lessen than 0 degree centigrade because as we have seen , that with reducing temperature you can get a higher molecular weight or molecular weight increases with a decreasing temperature .
Now , you have to maintain moisture free environment and if you , and if you are actually using H 2 as a cocatalyst , then we should add H 2 O in the symmetric amount with respect to the catalyst because moisture or H 2 is present in excess than what you desired as a cocatalyst .
Then the cationic propagating species will react immediately with the water molecule and terminate the polymerization or propagating chain .
And for the same reason , the purity of , purity of monomers are very important .
If there are impurities , which can undergo side reaction , do chain transfer reactions , then there molecular build up is a problem and these reactions , because oxygen is also a .
For this cationic polymerization an inert atmosphere is needed and for that the nitrogen or the argon gas , which are used for creating the inert atmosphere .
They must be purified very and because these reaction are very fast reaction , sometimes it happens in seconds and the cationic chains reactions , actually you can make arrangements to , to perform the reaction , you might have to arrange or purify the monomer and the gas nitrogen , argon and you have to make this your container or the reactor moisture free .
For that you might spend lot of time , but reaction happens very quickly within second and because it happens so quickly , generate lots of heat and sometimes there is a heat management is also a problem .
Now , for all these reasons , as I said in the very beginning , that doing or carrying out this cationic chain polymerization in large scale industrial scenario is very difficult , that is why , this cationic chain polymerization are not practiced commercially for many monomers .
The only monomers , which are synthesized in commercial scales is butyl rubber .
Butyl rubber , which is basically copolymer of isobutylene , the example of which we get many times in this lecture and small quantities of isoprene , this is done at very low temperature , 90 degree centigrade with aluminum chloride catalyst and in chlorinated solvent .
Now , this butyl rubber has remained flexible at low temperature , like minus 50 degree .
So , they are used in the inert use of the tyres engineer , autobody mounts and electrical cable insulator , protective gloves , etcetera and some form of stoppers .
So , this is the only polymers or copolymers used , which utilized this cationic chain polymerization commercially .
Now , let us move to the next topic of anionic chain polymerization .
Now , it is similar to cationic , but there are some significant differences as well .
One difference is that the difference in the activity of these different ion - pairs is much , much strong in case of anionic polymers , anionic chain reactions , which means , that reactivity of free ion , the difference in reactivity of free ion - pair , which is a tight ion - pair , is much more important in case of ionic chain polymer , anionic chain polymerization than in case of cationic chain polymerization .
There could be the other differences as well and this is not , at not , as temperature sensitive , as cationic polymerization .
And generally , E R , the activation of is positive , small positive .
So , if you decrease temperature , rate of reaction goes down .
So , generally reactions are down at ambient temperature or may be slightly higher than ambient temperature solvent is very important , even more in case of anionic polymerization you can , the solvents are mainly used is aliphatic or aromatic hydrocarbons .
You cannot use halogenated solvents , which were suitable for cationic polymerization because they are fissile reactions with the carbon ions and other polar solvents like alcohols or ketones , esters also cannot be used , as well as , H 2 O cannot be used because the same reason of cationic , because they can very quickly react with the carboionic propagating species and terminate the chain reaction .
Now , other difference of anionic polymerization with cationic polymerization is this possibility of the transfer reaction .
Now , in case of cationic we have seen , that in case of cationic we have seen very fissile beta proton transfer or elimination reaction happening for this transfer reaction , where in case of anionic polymerization you require beta hydride elimination for those transfer reactions with monomer solvent and counterion , all these things to happen .
Now , hydride elimination is not very easy thing .
So , this extent of transfer reaction for anionic polymerization is much less compared to cationic polymerization , which means , that the side reactions and the , cation , the chain transfer reactions are very less if you have a very pure monomer and moisture free environment .
That is why , leaving anionic polymer polymerization , leaving anionic polymerization is comparatively easier than cationic polymerization because you , in case of cationic polymerization , these transfer reactions are very common and fissile , where in case of anionic this transfer reaction is required beta hydride elimination , which is , which is not easy thing .
So , leaving anionic polymerization is quite often easily achieved compared to a living cationic polymerization .
Now let us talk about the three steps , initiation , in case of anionic polymerization are initiation .
Most important is using alkyl lithium .
For example , I have this butyl lithium , which can react with monomers CH 2 … This alkyl lithiums are equal to , make this , this curve initiator soluble in organic solvent or soluble in non - polar solvent , as we have seen earlier , how we have discussed earlier , that anionic polymers are typically down at aliphatic hydrocarbons , aromatic hydrocarbons .
Other initiations possible by electron transfer , electron transfer , for example , reaction between sodium and naphthalene .
Now , this can react with 1 mole of same molecules , let us , this is another possibility where sodium can react with naphthalene by electron transfer , you can generate anionic species , which can initiate it , can react with the monomer to initiate the chains .
If I write the chain initial reaction for that electron transfer reaction , it can react with the monomer to initiate the chain say Y s , styrene , we are talking about styrene polymerization here .
This , it is , in it now this can primarize .
This is the example of how initiation is done with electron transfer .
In this case we took example of sodium and naphthalene and in this case you can see this final or initiate thing chain species form is this , which actually can extend or propagate from both the sides .
So , you can have reactions happening in both the , propagation happening in both the sides .
If we talk about the , this propagation of this butyl lithium reaction , which is , this is butyl lithium , which is common and more important .
Let me write the propagation reaction for that , generic propagation reaction , and if you talk about the propagation reaction of this , this species , then you can write propagation reaction .
This plus… Basically , this , as I said , it can propagate from both the sides .
This is what the propagation reaction will generically look like .
Now , this , these are the examples where you do not have an inherent termination reaction .
In both this case , this initiation by alkyl lithium and also by this electron transfer , you do not have any inherent termination reaction .
So , the reaction can proceed without a termination reaction or and the reaction of the propagating chain can remain leaving .
But if you , if you want to stop the reaction for whatever reason , then you can add an agent , which could be alcohol or water , which can actually react with , immediately with these active anionic carboionic chain end and stop the reaction .
So , termination reaction , if you can add H 2 O or say methanol or any other alcohol and which can terminate this reaction very quickly .
Now , this is not sufficiently neucleofilic to reinitiate a chain polymerization , which also means , that if you have H 2 O present , undesired H 2 O present giving the polymerization medium , in a , in the polymerization medium , then it has very detrimental effect in terms of molecular rate build up because if there are trace amount of history also , this will immediately react with the propagating carbon ion anionic end and stop the reaction immediately , which will have very detrimental effect in terms of building molecular weight .
Now , they are , there are , there are not termination reactions for these type of initiation or propagation reaction , but some polar monomers can have side reactions present , which actually can , which actually can determine or be detrimental for your molecular weight build up .
And there are other possible initiation reactions , which we will discuss in the next lecture where inherently , there could be termination reactions possible .
So , what we have done in this lecture ?
We have talked about general features of anionic polymerization .
Anionic polymerizations , as I said that it is much more solvent dependent compared to cationic , cationic chain polymerization .
And the inherent termination reactions , as in the case of cationic polymerization by beta proton elimination , in that cationic polymerization case are not present here because beta hydride elimination is difficult .
So , it is always comparatively easy to carry out leaving anionic polymerization than leaving cationic polymerization .
And we talk to define initiations possibilities of this anionic polymerization and most important of this is using alkyl lithium .
And there are other possibilities using these where electron transfer reactions , examples given sodium and naphthalene , and as this , as if seen this propagation state , that termination is not present .
So , if one requires to terminate the chain , you can add externally this H 2 O or alcohol to terminate the chain .
But there are some polar monomers , like methyl methaculate or methyl vinyl ketone , which can undergo side reaction , which actually restrict the molecular build up .
In next lecture what we will talk ?
We will start giving that example of the side reactions in case of the polar monomers like methyl methaculate or or methyl vinyl or methyl ketones where the side reactions , the molecular build up is difficult .
And also , we gave example of other type of initiation reactions where there could be inherent termination reaction .
And in the in next , next lecture you also consider the little bit of energetic , how the temperature affects the anionic polymerization and how the molecular weight distribution is in case of anionic chain polymerization and how to get the molecular weight from the initial monomer and initiator ratio .
So , with this we , I stop this lecture and in the next lecture I will continue with this anionic chain polymerization .
And and we will start the other type of polymerization in the second half or the latter half of the next lecture .
You would recall that in our previous lecture we had discussed what are immobilized enzymes , why should we immobilize enzymes and what are the requirements of immobilization of enzymes and the three major requirements – a soluble enzyme and the carrier and method of immobilization .
We were looking into their characteristics .
The soluble enzyme , as we all know , required for immobilization must have certain properties that is it should possess high specific activity and also desirable functional properties that are required for use of immobilization enzyme .
Besides that the carrier must also have certain properties like porosity that means large surface area so that heavy enzyme loading can be given to the immobilized preparation and we were talking about methods of immobilization .
A large numbers of methods of immobilization are reported in literature .
Most of them can be classified simply into three major categories one is carrier binding methods .
In most methods we take either a prefabricated carrier or a carrier for conditioning either activation or some conditioning and couple that to the enzyme with a physico - chemical interaction .
It could be a covalent bond , it could be some non - covalent interactions and those methods fall under carrier binding methods .
Typical examples are adsorption ; covalent binding and we will be discussing them in detail .
The other method is cross linking .
The enzymes themselves posses a large number of functional groups which can be made to react to each other , thereby aggregating the molecules and making them insoluble in water .
The aggregates will be insoluble and they can be used as immobilized preparation which can be readily separated from the lipid phase .
Just to repeat the cross linking refers to linking more than one enzyme molecule through their functional residues present on their surface .
Most of the enzyme molecules will have a large number of functional residues .
They may be hydrophobic groups ; they may be electrostatic charges or other functional residues .
They can be linked under certain conditions , under ambient condition so that their inactivation is not allowed and on those conditions aggregates of the enzymes can be made which can function as immobilized enzymes .
The third type of method is entrapment methods where the enzymes are entrapped within a matrix .
It could be a gel , it could be a micro capsule and there by you could provide them an environment which is very analogues to a living cell and then use them as immobilize preparations .
You can see that a large number of methods are available .
Under each category also there are number of methods and we need to choose a suitable method for a particular purpose .
There are no general rules .
It often goes by trial and error and some available information .
Out of the methods available , which we will discuss subsequently , if we have to choose an immobilization method to use for a specific application there are four distinct parameters which should be looked into .
The first and probably the foremost is yield of immobilization .
That means during immobilization procedure what is the loss of enzyme activity because there is no method which can give you hundred percent recovery of the enzyme activity that you have put into the system .
There will be some enzyme which will be deactivated or lost during the immobilization and the loss of enzyme activity has to be kept minimum for all practical purposes .
When you consider the yield of an immobilization , it is basically a term which can be considered on the basis of material balance .
That means if you take a soluble enzyme , add to a carrier and allow it by any method of immobilization we get two streams - one will be residual enzyme activity in the supernatant which is left uncoupled and immobilized enzyme preparation .
This is the total picture of all the species that will be available and the loss of enzyme activity , soluble enzyme activity let us say as E0 , residual enzyme activity as Er and the immobilize enzyme activity as Ei , then the loss of enzyme activity is E0 - Er - Ei / E0 That is the loss or rather fractional loss of enzyme activity .
Of the total enzyme activity , the activity is distributed into two fractions - the immobilized enzyme as well as the uncoupled enzyme in the residue and these two theoretically should combine and form the total value of E0 but very often at the end of a method there is some balance left and the balance is the loss due to deactivation during immobilization .
The yield of the immobilization is defined as r = Ei / E0 - Er Very often there is confusion in reporting these terms and that ’ s why I have tried to put them in the form of an expression .
While we talk of a yield we must keep into mind the residual activity in the supernatant .
Its not in the total enzyme because part of the enzyme has been recovered in the supernatant which if desired can be recycled .
Therefore the yield will be the activity which is recovered in the immobilized form divided by E0 - Ei in the residue .
When you talk of Ei that is the activity of immobilized enzyme you are measuring in terms of the activity only .
So that means it is active .
Right in the beginning I made it very clear that when we talk of quantification of enzyme it is just not a physical quantity like mass or concentration .
It is the functional property .
Its quantity is functional property and the activity represents functional activity .
We are not measuring Ei in terms of protein contents .
I am measuring all these terms E0 , Er and Ei in terms of catalytic activity .
So it is functional .
This loss , if it is a let us a physical quantity like protein concentration the balance will be perfect .
You cannot account for any loss of protein in the system .
It is only the loss of activity because of the conformational changes .
The other factor which is important to be considered is enzyme loading .
That means that becomes almost similar parameter like what you considered in case of a soluble enzyme that is specific activity .
When we talk about specific activity higher the specific activity , enzyme is catalytically better .
Similarly in case of enzyme loading we talk of international units per gram of carrier or if you take into account the bulk density of the carrier you can also say international units per ml of carrier bed that means you pack the carrier into a bed , packed bed , and then consider the volume .
You can express them in either quantity , either as international units per gram of carrier loading or sometimes we can also refer them in terms of volume and thereby it can be compared directly to the soluble enzyme .
So enzyme loading is another factor and we want a preparation with as high loading as possible theoretically .
The enzyme loading will also have a direct linkage with the mass transfer limitations .
We will see subsequently how mass transfer and catalytic activity are linked .
Then the third parameter which is important to look at is storage and operational stability .
As I mentioned that we have to look for enzyme and one of the major advantage of immobilized enzyme is that they can be reused , they can be repeatedly used , continuously used and therefore they must possess a much higher stability than the soluble enzyme .
This stability is not only in terms of use but also during storage and this parameter is usually expressed in terms of half life .
Either half life during storage that means the time in which the activity loses to fifty percent of the original activity or during use in a continuous reactor or in a batch reactor that is in terms of number of cycles .
You can express in that term .
That will be only restricted when you are talking of a fibre or a surface .
The most commonly used matrices are beads - the spherical particles and that ’ s why gram or volume and they are packed in a packed bed .
When I say per ml I am referring to a parameter which is analogues to use in a packed bed .
But if you this in a surface , in fibre or in a film you can also express in terms of a surface area .
That is always allowed .
But for all industrial application the surface excepting for biosensors and things like that which are very specific applications , for industrial catalysis it is used in the form of particles and used with the packed bed .
We will discuss those aspects subsequently .
Iu / m2 also is a feasible parameter that we can define .
Then the fourth property which is a very important basis for choosing the immobilization method is carrier cost and regenerability because each method has a limitation of the choice of carrier .
For example in the case of adsorption you require a carrier .
If suppose you want to adsorb by ionic binding , you need a carrier which possesses charges .
Similarly if you want a covalent binding you need a carrier which possesses certain functional residues which can be coupled to the enzyme .
So each method will have some limitations on the choice of carrier and therefore the cost of the carrier .
Another parameter which must be taken into account is regenerability .
Very often even after the immobilized enzyme preparation has been exhausted during use the carrier can be recovered and reused .
So the cost of the carrier must be taken into account in terms of per cycle not the absolute cost .
You must differentiate between the absolute cost and cost of the carrier per cycle .
Because many of the carriers although expensive , can be used for a long period and in number of repeated cycles .
Therefore they are still acceptable and desirable because of other desirable property .
The first and probably the simplest method of immobilization is by adsorption .
The adsorption method is a very broad , non - specific method and it involves binding of the enzyme to the surface of an insoluble carrier that has not been specifically functionalized for covalent coupling .
I must mark here particularly the phrase “specifically functionalized for covalent coupling ” .
This probably gives you an idea that this is a very broad non - specific method .
If we consider all the carrier binding methods excluding those which involve covalent linkage , rest of all the bindings , interactions between the carrier and the enzyme are covered under the term called adsorption .
A very broad based method which involves a number of non - specific , multivariant , reversible interactions between the enzyme and the carrier at mild conditions .
The second point also builts in a number of phrases .
For example the interactions that are involved are non - specific , very often more than one interaction is involved in a particular method , multivariant that means more than one physical property is employed .
In most cases the methods based on adsorption are reversible in nature .
That means under certain conditions while you can adsorb the enzyme on to a carrier you can also create condition by which you can desorb the enzyme .
The basic property of this reversible interaction also makes it a weak binding .
Weak binding in the sense while during use , the enzyme can also dissolve slowly over a long period of time and if the carrier characteristics are sturdy they can be regenerated and reused .
But enzyme loss can be there big time , over a long period of time .
Multivariant means that more than one physico - chemical interaction is involved in binding .
Another feature is mild conditions and that will apply to most of the immobilization methods and also to adsorption .
That means the environmental conditions required for adsorption must be mild and here I think I like to very specifically define the term mild .
Mild refers here not to the value one or two it refers to those conditions under which enzyme is conformationally stable .
The definition of mild condition refers to those conditions which are environmentally acceptable to the enzyme .
If the enzyme is stable at 70ºC , 70ºC is acceptable and can be considered as mild .
But if the enzyme is not stable even at 20ºC you may have to go to 4 degrees to immobilize and the definition of mild will remain at 4 degrees .
I have purposely not used the word ambient because you refer it to a well definite range .
The advantage of the situation is that usually the methods based on adsorption results in high yields .
We are giving the definition of yield that means the total amount of activity , which is resulting in the immobilized preparation is reasonably high , almost in the range of say about 70 to 90 % enzyme activity is recovered in immobilized preparation and because the conditions are mild they don ’ t tend to cause conformational change so that is a very plus point as compared to other methods in which yields will be much lower .
A disadvantage is that the preparations do not have very high operational stability .
The method is reversible in nature , the interactions are reversible and so operational stability is usually not very high .
Although by various other manipulations like adsorption , coupling with cross linking the operational stability can be improved but intrinsically adsorption based methods are usually operationally high .
Again when I say the term high it refers in the comparative form and the comparison here is with covalent binding .
If suppose in the case of covalent binding half lives are of the order of few months here it may be of the order of few days .
So that is what it refers to but allows the regeneration with carrier .
On the other hand although the operational stability is not very high but the advantage is that the carrier can be regenerated and reused .
That is the plus point .
You have a large variety of carriers that can be used .
We will look at some of the examples of the carriers and finally adsorption based methods have been very often used to study the enzymology of systems that naturally occur in biological system because in case of living cells most of the enzymes are supported on a solid matrix through adsorption only .
There are no covalent linkages .
Either the enzymes are supported on membrane or they are supported on certain particulate matters and therefore the methods based on adsorption are usually very analogues similar to those that are found in the living system .
Operational stability is defined in terms of half life .
Consider the use of immobilized enzyme in a reactor and pack it in a packed bed , feed in and effluent out .
Here X - axis is operational time and Y - axis is fraction of conversion .
What you notice is that when you start at zero time the fraction of conversion will keep on going down as the enzyme activity is reduced or lost .
The fraction of conversion keeping the residence time constant and over operational time , this is operational time not the residence time , residence time is constant here it will go down .
If you consider as a first order process then the half life of this that means the time it takes to reach the fifty percent of the original value is half life .
If we consider E = E0 e - kdt You can simply calculate half life as t1 / 2 = 0.69 / kd t1 / 2 is less in the case of adsorption .
Other way , compared to covalent binding .
Right . Because the interaction is reversible in nature so it keeps leaking .
A very crude term could be the enzyme keeps leaking values , very small amounts , slowly not in a very fast rate .
This property of leaking of the enzyme from immobilized preparation has been very advantageously used in many cases of the enzyme therapy purposes , where we want to put an immobilized enzyme preparation onsite at a site where the enzyme is required and the enzyme must leak continuously not in a very high concentration and over a long period of time .
Some systems like immobilized …… .
has been inserted into the blood stream in the immobilized forms - microcapsules and the enzyme leaks slowly and the immobilized system can remain in blood stream over a few months .
You have to give another shot to keep the enzyme activity available in the blood stream .
So these methods can have an advantage that the reversible nature can also be used in some cases where you want to use the drug or a therapeutic agent with the requirement of slow availability over a long period of time .
As far as study of reactor system is concerned , we are not measuring the enzyme activity every time .
What we are measuring is the conversion at the effluent .
Conversion is related to the enzyme activity .
So that ’ s why the graph is in the form of conversion .
Three most common types of adsorption methods are based on physical adsorption which is again a most non - specific type of adsorption where we use hydrogen bonding , electrostatic interactions or Vanderwaal interactions , a variety of interactions where there is no specific reasons and we use a very broad range of carriers like alumina , celite , bentonite , glass etc where which by certain conditions of pH , temperature and salt you can adsorb the enzyme on to the surface and they can be used .
The second method is ionic binding where you take a tailored matrix which has a definite charge on the surface and ion exchange resins are the most commonly used matrices .
DEAE - Cellulose , Amberlite etc which are charged particles and these charged particles based on the electrostatic interaction can bind the enzyme molecules at a pH where the net charge is counter .
The enzyme at this stage is counter charged at a particular condition .
The third category is hydrophobic binding where we predominantly use hydrophobic interactions on the surface of the carrier and the hydrophobic interactions on the surface of the enzyme protein .
Although bulk of the hydrophobic residues are buried inside the residue of enzyme but still on the surface there are very small hydrophobic patches which can be used here for immobilizing on to the surface of a hydrophobic carrier ; carriers like polypropylene beads .
There is a commercial product by the name Accurel , which is a microporous carrier consisting of polypropylene , butyl or hexyl sepharose etc .
There are number of hydrophobic carriers used and which are available for binding of enzyme .
Many of the carriers which are available today for adsorption of enzymes are developed for chromatographic separations .
For example all the carriers like hydrophobic binding or ionic binding were originally developed for chromatographic separations where the function is same .
That means you are binding through ionic interactions and desorbing it under the conditions of desorption and therefore the same thing applies here .
In fact the preparation of immobilized enzyme by adsorption is very much similar to chromatographic separations on ion exchange resin , although we are only interested in the first part of it .
Only adsorption part ; desorption is not our interest where as in the case of chromatography both the parts are important .
Another important group of adsorption methods is metal salt linkage .
Certain metal salts like titanium tetra chloride and ferric chloride form a kind of an inorganic bridge on the surface of the carrier and to which the enzyme molecules can couple .
The linkage that is formed , what we have in the literature and what people have used , is the metal salt linkage .
It is not a covalent linkage ; it is a physical interaction and there by the enzyme is held but has been very successful method from the practical point of view .
We will discuss that in detail .
Most of the adsorption methods can be characterized by the classical adsorption isotherms .
Depending on the nature of the carrier and nature of the enzyme that we are talking about , the isotherms may vary .
Three general types of isotherms are known .
One is linear where q is the concentration of the enzyme protein on to the surface of the carrier ; y is the corresponding concentration in the solution at equilibrium .
If you take a combination of enzyme in carrier concentration and at equilibrium measure the concentration in the solid phase and the liquid and you make an isotherm , then you may end up sometime in some cases a linear relationship where q is equal to k.y To make the isotherm , take different ratios of the carrier and the enzyme activity .
That means enzyme activity to carrier ratio is varied and at different combinations you allow equilibrium to be formed and under equilibrium condition you measure the concentration of the enzyme in the liquid phase and also in the solid phase .
Each point represents a particular enzyme to carrier ratio .
You can find three different types of isotherms : linear is simple ; Freundlich is more general in the sense that it does not fit into any hypothesis but in general you can vary curve fitting .
What ever kind of isotherm you get , you just raise to a factor of n and by analysis of your data you will calculate the value of k and n .
You could make a log log plot and you can get the value of k and n .
The most established and analytically proven method is Langmuir isotherm .
Here q is the concentration of the enzyme protein on to the solid matrix and q0 is the maximum capacity of the matrix .
If you take a very high enzyme concentration compared to carrier , allow equilibrium to be established that means the concentration of the enzyme on to the immobilized preparation which will represent the saturation behavior is q0 .
You will notice that it is analogues to your Michaelis Menten kinetics .
These three expressions the Langmuir isotherm , Michaelis Menten kinetics , hyperbolic expression and also the Mannose equation for cell growth are almost analogues expressions and that indicates that there is some inter relationship or some similarity in their basic physical interpretation .
Langmuir isotherm is based on a theoretical development .
One can develop on the basis of number of binding sites on the carrier molecule for enzyme .
Here just like we consider the enzyme substrate binding where the enzyme acts as the carrier and the substrate is ligand here the carrier will be the matrix and the protein will be the ligand and on those conditions you can develop it or you can analyze it by a double reciprocal plot .
The analogy is that the three expressions , the Langmuir adsorption isotherm , the Michaelis Menten kinetics and Mannose kinetics for cell growth they are analogues terms .
You have to develop an analogy and understand the relationship of the corresponding terms .
In the case of enzyme we are talking of enzyme substrate complex formation .
That means enzyme is the matrix , surface is a ligand .
If we talk in terms of adsorption , the substrate gets adsorbed on to the enzyme surface .
On the other hand here in the case of adsorption the enzyme is itself a ligand and the matrix or the carrier is the surface on which the ligand adsorbs .
In the third case , in the case of cell growth , the Mannose model of microbial cell growth it is a substrate which is a ligand just like enzymes but the matrix is the cell mass itself and it reflects the transport of substrate into the cell .
So this is adsorption that is transport and enzyme catalyses enzyme substrate binding .
So these three phenomena are intrinsically someway related because they end up in a similar kind of a kinetic expression .
As far as the analysis is concerned all the three can also be analyzed by a double reciprocal plot .
That is if you plot 1 / q versus 1 / y you will get a linear plot and you will get the value of q0 and k .
The adsorption process for a particular enzyme and for a particular carrier can be analyzed quantitatively .
Many physical factors influence the adsorption process .
I have listed some of them here .
The first parameter is pH .
The pH will be a very major parameter which will affect the binding in the case of ionic binding .
Even for other forms of binding processes pH plays a key role and very often it has been noted that the binding by adsorption is maximum at its isoelectric points .
Large variety of relationships with respect to pH for the quantity adsorbed has been found .
There is no general ruling but in general or a common feature can be considered that at the isoelectric point the pH value will be most preferable for the adsorption processes .
No . Net charge is zero .
It is not that the proteins are not charged at that pH .
The negative and positive charges are equal .
Not that there is no charge .
The second parameter is salts .
Salts have a very complex behavior .
In fact it has almost opposite behavior .
You must have studied also in the case of bio separations particularly the concentration of salt is used for increasing as well as decreasing solubility .
Salting in and salting out both are feasible and of course the phenomena or the physical interactions are just opposite .
But in most cases the salt concentration is required to be kept at a minimum because salts are very good eluents also .
In ion exchange chromatography very often we use high ionic strength as a medium for elution of the adsorbed material .
Therefore at high salt concentration adsorption is usually poor and minimum salt concentration is required to be kept .
Protein concentration will be important and we have seen from the adsorption isotherm itself .
The definite ratio of protein to carrier will play a particular equilibrium behavior and higher the protein concentration you can reach nearer the saturation level at equilibrium .
Temperature again is a very significant parameter which must be understood .
If we look at adsorption of a small molecular weight material or a small molecular weight ligands on to a surface the general behavior is that increasing the temperature reduces the adsorption .
That means the quantity of ligand adsorbed per unit weight of the carrier for low molecular weight ligands will be less as you increase the temperature and the reason attributed to this is because of the movement of the particles as the temperature increases .
That means the movement of particle increases and the tendency is for desorbing rather than adsorption .
But in the case of protein adsorption when we are talking about enzymes , we are talking about proteins and macromolecules , adsorption over a narrow range of temperature offers a reverse phenomena .
That means adsorption increases with temperature .
Mind the word I am using “over a narrow range of temperature increase ” .
If you increase to a higher level desorption also might start .
But before desorption even inactivation might start .
But we consider the adsorption at …… range of temperature .
The primary factors responsible for the increase in adsorption with temperature are when the protein binds to a surface there is some unfolding of the protein molecules , which is an endothermic process and the increase of temperature resulting in enhanced adsorption supports the hypothesis that the binding or adsorption of a protein molecule or a polymeric material to a surface is an endothermic process coupled with unfolding of the confirmation .
When I say unfolding I am not referring to total deactivation but minor modification in the conformation which extends its total volume or total surface area .
The other factor which is important , which is probably attributing to this increase of adsorption with the increase in temperature is the diffusional processes because most of time we are talking about the carrier being a porous material and the ligands or the protein here have to diffuse into the surface , into the internal pore surface and the diffusion process gets increased by increase in temperature .
So both the unfolding of the protein molecule on the surface of the carrier and the diffusional processes involved in the adsorption in the internal pores ultimately leads to give you a phenomenon which represents increase in adsorption with increase in temperature over a narrow range .
Carrier properties , depending on the property like surface property of the carrier particles which were used as matrix , will also play a role on the adsorption behaviour depending on the nature may be sometime even the carriers are pre - conditioned , swollen to improve the property .
Time of adsorption is another parameter which is significant and important because we are talking about the macromolecular adsorption .
So the diffusion is involved and the time required very often is controlled by diffusional limitations and the rate of diffusion controls the time required for adsorption process .
This in the case of a small ligand is not a constant .
For adsorption we follow a number of methods .
At least four major methods are used for adsorption .
The first and probably the most trivial method is the static process .
That means you bring in an enzyme solution in contact with a carrier and leave it over night or over a long period of time .
Adsorption takes place without any hesitation .
It takes a very long time and that is the process very often many people use in laboratories .
The yields are also much lower particularly for porous carrier because of the diffusional limitations .
One of the most disadvantageous situations in the case of static process is that the loading of the enzyme is not uniform over the carrier .
Even if you allow for a long period the loading is usually not uniform .
Suppose this is the carrier particle .
You have lot of enzyme molecules on the surface but on the interior it is very , very rarely distributed and the loading is not uniform .
The most commonly used method in the laboratories is dynamic batch process in which you mix the two components , the enzyme and the carrier under known conditions or under standard conditions for adsorption , which favours adsorption and agitate them , stir them mechanically , under mild stirring so that the carrier particle should not get degraded and also the enzyme molecules should not be influenced .
The equilibrium is allowed to be reached over a period of time .
It usually leads to a fast method and most common method used in the laboratories .
The third method is the reactor loading process .
In the commercial establishment when we use adsorption as the method of immobilization we use reactor loading process .
That means first of all the reactor which is to be used for bio - conversion of the enzymatic reaction is packed with the carrier itself and then the enzyme solution is recirculated constantly through the carrier bed and over a period of time the enzyme gets adsorbed on the matrix .
It could not only be packed bed ; it could also be stirred reactor in which the enzyme is added and the enzyme solution is allowed to be stirred along with the carrier and after a period of time when the supernatant enzyme activity has come to minimum value you stop the process .
In all these methods which we are talking about , the final step is washing because very often you will have that some of the enzyme will be adhering to the surface of the particles which is not really immobilized in the proper sense .
It is not adsorbed ; some adhering along with the liquid and so fresh wash of the buffer at a particular pH should be given so that all the adhering enzyme is washed out and only that which is physically bound by adsorption is retained by the carrier .
The final washing in the case of reactor loading process is done with the substrate solution itself because during the operation it has to meet the environmental conditions which are provided by the substrate solution , the feed .
Under those conditions it must remain adsorbed and so the final washing in the case of a reactor loading method is provided by the feed substrate itself so that whatever desorption has to take place under feed substrate condition , takes place and the enzyme is in the stable form .
The fourth method is electrodeposition process in which the carrier is placed in proximity to one of the electrodes and the current is applied between the two electrodes and the enzyme particles which are charged usually they get deposited on the carrier particles and at the end the carrier is removed which gets coated by the enzyme particle .
One thing we have to keep in mind , a very important feature that during the electro chemical process there will be certain ions which will be removed from the electrodes or from the process .
If the ions are important for enzyme activity then they must be provided in the electrolyte itself .
Extra quantity of those will be provided in the electrolyte otherwise you will not be having a functional enzyme preparation in the immobilized form .
The last method based on the adsorption process is by inorganic bridge formation as I mentioned or metal salt linkage .
This was originally developed by British group Barker , Emery and Novais , one of the references I have sited here , in seventy one .
It involves the metal salt linkage .
The basic principle of the method is the method employs transition metal salts like titanium tetrachloride , zirconium tetrachloride or ferric chloride for linking an enzyme to the carrier .
Carriers are usually cellulose , nylon , glass beads etc .
The usual method is that an activated carrier is prepared by steeping it in a solution of transition metal salt for five to ten minutes and mind it that it is important because longer contact of the matrix in the transient salt solution can result in the degradation because the pH of this solution , like titanium tetra chloride , will be very , very low , almost one to two .
If you put cellulose into it , it might get degraded totally .
So the time of contact is very important and it is not used mostly more than five minutes and if you take a dilute solution probably you can go higher , followed by filtering and drying of complex at 45ºC .
Excess unreacted salt is washed with buffer .
The activated carrier is then stirred with the buffered enzyme solution followed by washing of the unbound enzyme .
The method is very simple and involves two steps , activation of the matrix by steeping it in a transition metal salt solution whereby the transition metal salts form an octahedral complex .
The chemistry of that can be considered like this .
Titanium tetra chloride will exist in different forms and the complexes will be either dominated by water molecules as the ligand in the octahedral complex form .
The titanium tetra chloride solution will exist in different forms complexed with certain ligands .
For example in solution water molecule will be present as the ligand and will complex with water and chloride ions .
In aqueous form titanium has five water molecules and one chloride .
It can also exist as the chloro complex ; five chloride ions and one water molecules .
It can also exist as total chloride ions in the case of a co - ordination complex .
So when this solution is brought in contact with the matrix , any carbohydrate matrix , cellulose has been a very commonly used matrix , then what happens is that these ligands are replaced by the hydroxyl groups present on the carbohydrate molecule .
The ligand particularly the water molecules which are present here are replaced by the hydroxyl groups present on the carbohydrate molecule and you make a network , titanium treated cellulose which is complexed along with the length of the chain on the carbohydrate is formed .
When this activated matrix , we consider this as an activated complex , is further brought into contact with the protein or enzyme again some of the water molecules are replaced by the functional groups on the enzyme .
Wherever you see water molecules , for example these ones they may be replaced by enzyme molecules .
Wherever hydroxyl groups are present they can replace part of them and what ends up is a matrix which has a coordination link of titanium tetra chloride salt along with the enzyme molecule .
One of the major advantages is that you always end up having a distance between the carrier surface and the enzyme molecules .
Therefore enzyme molecules and the carrier surface are separated by these linkages , the metal salt linkages .
That provides you a very big advantage of removing the steric hindrance .
Many of the enzymes when they are coupled to a solid matrix may not be able to interact with the substrate because of steric hindrance .
But in this case because there is distance between the matrix surface and the enzyme , steric hindrance is minimized .
The second major advantage which has been noted in these cases is that if you use a regenerated carrier after the enzyme has been leached out , you again immobilize the enzyme on the regenerated carrier .
It gives you a much increased activity and that is the major advantage .
The major reason has been that the distance from surface has increased .
So steric hindrances are further decreased and therefore particularly with those enzymes which are known to have steric hindrances during immobilization , the ones which use much larger polymers as the substrate , for those systems the method is very significant .
So these are the various methods that we have discussed today .
The various methods that involve the coupling of enzyme by adsorption to a matrix and their characteristic features and as I mentioned that the immobilization methods must be evaluated on the basis of their yield , operational stability and carrier regenerability .
We stop here .
Welcome back to this course in Polymer Chemistry .
And in this lecture we will continue our discussion on Polymer Stereochemistry and Coordination Polymers , which we began in the last lecture .
Now , in last lecture we had discussed this page , and remember we discussed this that if this active chain end in a propagating chain , polymer chain , if this carbon is radical or it is a anion or cation with a counter ion which is not strongly binded .
If the counter ion for anionic or cationic case they are free , then what happens ?
This carbon atom is a planar molecule and then when you , when the next monomer approach , it can approach from either side .
So , the configuration of this carbon is determined by the configuration of the penultimate carbon with this case , this carbon .
And obviously it is always preferred that this bulky group will be or the group substitution group will be the other side of the R group which is in the , in this penultimate carbon ; which means syndiotactic polymers will be always preferred ; syndiotactic addition will always be preferred than a isotactic addition .
And these preferences will always go up if you increase the temperature .
Now , how to synthesize a highly isotactic ?
And we also said that if we increase the temperature , obviously the tendency for syndiotactic and isotactic will be significant .
So , we will be going to get a atactic polymer at higher temperature .
So , basically we know how to get a syndiotactic polymer and we know how to get a atactic polymer .
So , how to get a highly isotactic polymers ?
Now , we can get a highly isotactic polymers if we do a ionic polymerization such that , we have a very strong coordination between the counter ion , the monomer , the incoming monomer and the active chain and which could be a cation or an anion .
So , if I carry out a ionic polymerization where we have a strong coordination between the counter ion with the cationic or anionic chain end and the incoming monomer , then the approach will be from , always from the same side of the same side , so you will get a isotactic polymerization .
Now , how do you get or create a condition where this thing , this coordination , strong coordination between the active chain end , the monomer and counter ion happen ?
Now , if we have a monomer which have a polar group as a , in the substituents like , say you have a methyl chlorate or ethyl group in the backbone , where this is a polar molecule .
So , this can actually coordinate with a with a cation in this case .
So , monomers with polar groups in the substituent will help in coordinating with the counter ion and the monomer ; the incoming monomer .
Now it is said that , if the monomers or if the chain end , the active chain end whether it is a cation or anion , if they are free with the with the counter ion and the active chain end , if they are free , then we have seen what are the types of stereochemistry we are going to get .
But if they are very tightly bound , then they can coordinate .
Now , how can we make sure that this counter ion and the active chain end are tightly bound ?
If you can carry out the reaction in a very nonpolar medium like hydrocarbon , and if we have a counter ion which is small in size , so that they will be tightly bound .
For example , like Lithium .
And if we can carry out this reaction at low temperature , what happen ?
Then we can get coordination ; strong coordination between monomers and the incoming the active chain end and the counter ion .
Now , let us take an example of methyl methacrylate .
If we do the reaction , if we take the methyl methacrylate and do the reaction with a anionic initiator , say for example , butyl lithium in say toluene at a lower temperature .
So , if we consider say n butyl lithium as a initiator and toluene as your medium , nonpolar medium and set minus 78 degree temperature .
So , this condition will satisfy that the carbon ion chain end and the lithium counter ion are tightly bound , strongly bound each other .
And if that is the case , then you can imagine the situation like this ; where because of resonance , these ionic charges are distributed can in the three atom .
So this can , this counter ion help in strong coordination between the active chain end and the polar substituent of the another monomer residues present in the chain .
Now if such thing happens , then what happened ?
One of the sides is blocked .
So the new monomer , the incoming monomer can approach from only one single side .
So , there is a loose cyclic intermediate formation and one side is blocked by lithium .
So , monomer can approach ; the incoming monomer can approach only from a single side and always producing an isotactic polymer .
So you , if you do this reaction in lower temperature , nonpolar medium with a lithium plus type small counter ion , you can get highly isotactic polymers .
Now , if you can do the same thing with isobutyl vinyl ether and make a cationic polymerization with say B F 3 H 2 O B F 3 , and H 2 O type initiator , then you have a cationic group , and again now an anionic counter ion which are tightly bound ; because you are carrying out .
This is a nonpolar medium .
Again you can think of a similar MMA type situation , where in this case the counter ion is actually giving a strong coordination between the… this is monomer substituent and the incoming monomer forming this type of intermediates .
And again all the sides is blocked .
So the monomer , incoming monomer can add to the chain from only single side .
And you can get a isotactic polymer always .
So , if we look at some data ; let us consider methyl methacrylate as a… This is a normal butyl lithium in toluene at minus 80 degrees 78 degree centigrade .
That is the example I gave in the last page that produce isotactic poly methyl methacrylate .
Look , if we have the same polymerization , same temperature , same initiator , but if you increase the polarity of the medium , obviously if you increase the polarity of the medium , T H F is highly polar solvent .
So , the counter ion is not tightly bound ; so strongly bound with the active anion end .
They are free they are free ion ; the lithium ion is a free ion , which means the chain end has a planar geometry .
And as we discussed it will give you a syndiotactic polymer , syndiotactic methyl methacrylate .
Now , if you increase the temperature it will be the same reaction with butyl lithium in T H F .
And do it in a much higher temperature , then you are going to get a mixture of isotactic and syndiotactic component .
In the polymers , you are going to get a atactic polymerization .
This is the example of cationic polymerization which has B F 3 threat in propane as minus 60 degree centigrade .
That is the example ; cationic example just gave and which gives you a isotactic polymer .
So , what we know that that radical polymerization will always give preferably syndiotactic syndiotactic polymers .
And this do not get dominated if you increase decrease the temperature .
Now if you , for ionic polymerization if we do polymerization in condition where the ionic chain end and counter ion they are present as the free ion , then they will be … as a radical polymerization. .. And , if we do the reaction in conditions so that , the counter ion is strongly bound with the active chain end , then what happened ?
That , which we get , if we do reaction in the nonpolar medium at low temperature and with a , as a small counter ion , then there will be a possibility of a strong coordination between the monomer and the active chain end and the counter ion ; which will makes sure that the monomer , the incoming monomer gets into the chain from one side and which will produce a isotactic polymerization , isotactic polymers .
So , I know ; we know , what are the strategies ?
We should do to synthesize isotactic , syndiotactic and atactic polymerization .
Now , let us see how do you analyze how do you analyze these polymers .
Now , let us consider a simple molecule ; again same thing .
Now , if we write two pair ; two asymmetric pair of carbon atom , now this is the horizontal line .
This is your polymer backbone backbone .
And this line gives you the configuration of the carbon atom .
So this , in this case both the carbon atom , the asymmetric carbon atom has same configuration .
So , we call this as a mesodyad .
And if they are in opposite direction , then we call this is as a racimic dyad .
We write m ; we write r for this .
Now dyad tacticity ; this term dyad tacticity is defined as the fraction of pair of fraction of pairs ; these are pairs , this is another pair ; so fraction of pairs of adjacent repeat unit are in a particular Stereochemistry , say isotactic or syndiotactic .
So , if we write m ; m is the fraction of pair adjacent repeat units that are present in a isotactic geometry .
And r is the fraction of pairs of adjacent of repeat units that are present in syndiotactic geometry .
And of course , n plus r would be equals to 1 .
Now , sometimes few people write this is as a meso gives you isotactic , so they write as a ‘ i ’ , and the which gives a syndiotactic as small ‘ s ’ as well .
Now , we also can imagine Tryads .
Tryads , where we are talking about the three… center adjacent to each other ; like in this case , you have a meso pair and another meso pair .
So , which actually gives you isotactic polymers and we write this as m m ; so meso pair and another meso pair .
So , what will be ?
This is a racimic pair , this is also another racimic pair ; so gives you r r .
and this gives you a syndiotactic rearrangement .
Now , in this case you have another possibility where you have a meso dyad ; another is a racimic dyad .
So , you can have a meso , m r ; which gives you a heterotactic or atactic stereo arrangement .
Again , we define in a similar way ; m m is a fraction of these three and r r is fraction of syndiotactic tryad and m r is a fraction of heterotactic tryad .
So , we can write m m plus r r plus m r is equal to again 1 .
And sometimes , some people write this is this gives you isotactic , so they write I ; they gives you syndiotactic , so they write S and this is heterotactic , they write H .
Now , we can easily write other from this expression .
You can do yourself ; plus 0.5 m r and r as r r plus 0.5 m r .
Now for isotactic or atactic polymer , both fractions for r will be equals to half .
So , half of the dyads will be in racimic form .
So , basically it is a fifty - fifty mixture of isotactic polymers , dyads and racimic dyads ; which is a completely atactic polymer .
If you have an isotactic polymer , them m and m m , both the dyad and tryad would be equals to 1 .
And if it is syndiotactic , then r and r r also will be 1 .
Now in case of atactic you also can you can also write m m and r r is one fourth ; whereas m r , if you have this fifty fifty , then obviously this m r , the combination of m and r tryad will be half .
So , you can write this .
So , what we can do ?
We can identify this m and r from spectroscopic techniques like m m r .
We can use m m r techniques to find out the fraction of m , r or m r in the… All this we can find out quantitably from m m r experiment .
And if we can find out this , we will be able to determine what is the extent of isotacticity , and syndiotacticity in the polymer .
If m is greater than one fourth , so as the m m tryad ; then obviously , it is predominantly towards this giving going towards a isotactic .
It is more isotactic , rather than syndiotactic .
If r is greater than 0.25 and r r greater than one fourth , then it is towards a syndiotactic .
That you can , yourself , this is what happened .
If there is a mixture it is always a isotactic polymerization .
So , these are the… So we can , what we can do ?
We can take the polymer which is synthesized and get a quantitative m m r done .
And from that we can get the values of m , this one m m , r and r r .
This we can get .
And from that , the values for individual values we can actually estimate or we can predict or we can quantitatively get the amount of say tacticity ; which is the r fraction , which is the m fraction in the polymer itself .
Now , what we will do it ?
It will go and move to the next topic of Ziegler - Natta polymerization or coordination polymerization .
Now , it was first started around mid - 1950s mid 1950s where first Ziegler , Scientist in Germany , he was doing ethylene polymerization ; So , ethylene and in pressure Trialkyl aluminum .
Say for example , R 3 A l at high temperature high temperature plus high pressure , you only can got Oligomers ; so oligopoly ethylene or oligo ethylenes ; the maximum molecular of , maximum M W of around five thousand .
So , he was carrying out a polymerization reaction of ethylene in presence of a alkyl aluminum , Trialkyl aluminium and at high temperature and high pressure you only got oligomeric species , not a polymeric species .
What happened ?
When he added with this alkyl aluminum plus some transition metal compounds ?
When he added , then even at low temperature , say like low temperature means 50 to 100 degree centigrade and at low pressure , he got very high molecular weight polyethylene .
So basically , only… what is the change here ?
It is only the change of addition of transition metal compounds along with this alkyl aluminum .
Then , it was dramatically… The polymerization nature was dramatically changed .
You get a high , very high molecular polyethylene .
Now , this polyethylene is not branched like the polyethylene .
We discussed , while discussing the radical polymerization that , in case of radical polymerization you get a polyethylenes , which are branched because of chain transfer to polymers .
As we discussed , we recall from our discussion of chain transfer on radical polymerization .
In this case they are not branched ; they are linear high molecular polyethylene and that can be achieved even at low temperature , which is very means achievable or very comfortable temperature 50 degree to 100 degree centigrade , and even normal to low temperature , low pressure .
Now what happened ?
The same sort of catalyst was used by Natta .
He was from Italy .
What if… he used instead of ethylene , he has taken say alpha or say in this case propylene and used the same sort of catalyst ; alkyl aluminum plus transition metal compounds .
Now , what he got ?
He got high molecular weight polypropylene , definitely .
In addition , what he found that that was very stereo regular , stereo selective .
Depending up on exact polymeric conversion , it could be a completely isotactic or syndiotactic depending up on the exact condition .
But what he found that it not only gives high molecular weight polypropylene , but it also gives a very high stereo selectivity ; whether it is a isotactic , completely isotactic or syndiotactic .
Now these two discoveries has a tremendous effect in Polymer Science .
And even at nowadays , say more than thirty to forty percent of the carbon carbon , the polymers which are made from carbon carbon double bond , polymers which are made from carbon carbon double bonds , they are synthesized by these coordination polymerization technique .
See , imagine how , what is the tremendous effect it has this discovery by Ziegler and Natta has made ; a huge huge importance in Polymer Chemistry , which has given recognition to them in 1963 .
And they are jointly awarded the Noble prize in Chemistry .
Now , later on the large number of catalyst was discovered , developed .
And basically what happens ?
In… basically it is the combination of again the similar type of compounds and there has been a lot of research happened in this field .
And , most cases are organometallic compounds ; so organometallic compounds or hydride of a group one to three metal plus a halide or other compounds or other derivatives of group four to eight transition metals .
So , basically this are the… this is , this they would take one from here and one from here and constitute the catalyst , which is generally called Ziegler - Natta initiator or Ziegler - Natta catalyst .
For example , we can choose ; from this set , we can choose say triethyl aluminum or tri diethyl aluminum chloride or diethyl zinc , and from this we can say titanium , titanium chloride , tetrachloride , trichloride .
And we can use so many things and these mixtures take one from here and one from here and constitute the Ziegler - Natta initiators .
Until 2000 , more than ninety five percent of the Ziegler - Natta polymerization used combination of this sort of catalyst before the discovery of the metallization catalyst .
Where , instead of transition metal catalyst , metallocenes are used as a catalyst along with a co - initiator ; which we will discuss in a minute .
Now , most of the examples of Ziegler - Natta catalyst , let us put this Z - N , are titanium , from these two the titanium trichloride or 2 A l Cl or say titanium chloride plus… Most of the important industrial polymers are made from this .
And , this is the original polymer catalyst combination used by Ziegler .
And what happened when these things are mixed , Ti Cl 4 and triethyl aluminum ?
They have taken in a nonpolar solvent and they have mixed ; now it produces a titanium trichloride and this .
Now when you mix this two , as it was mixed by Ziegler what happens , this forms beta form of titanium chloride which is brown in color .
Now , that this particular catalyst form - beta form of titanium trichloride does not have very high selectivity .
What Natta found that , instead of using beta , other forms of titanium chloride like alpha or delta or gamma form of titanium trichloride ; if you use this sort of trichloride , then you get a very high stereospecificity , very high amount of isotacticity in this case .
Now , what happened ?
These two are , generally when the polymerization made these two polymers are mixed and ball milled that will mechanically grinded so that , that also increases the surface area of this catalyst .
We will see in a minute how the surface area is actually important for this catalyst and also it actually help in increase the activity of the polymerization .
Sometimes giving the development of the catalyst this titanium trichloride or tetrachloride , they are used along with a support like say magnesium chloride , where this titanium compound is either coherently bonded or they are occupied a crystal position in the lattice of the magnesium chloride support .
So , that actually helps the activity and the stereo specificity .
And sometimes with this sort of Trialkyl aluminium chloride or say dialkyl aluminum chloride , sometimes these electron donors are added .
Electron donors , like Lewis acids are added to increase the reactivity and the specificity stereo specificity of the catalyst .
Typically , the activity of the catalyst is measured as a k g ; k g of polymer produced per gram of catalyst in an hour or completely or at the end of the or at end of the your or for a complete polymerization .
So , the activity of the catalyst is defined as the k g of polymers per gram of the catalyst used ; we can use in other , per hour or at the end of the polymerization .
Now most cases , this type of the combination is your transitional metal compounds and alkyl aluminum compounds .
They produce completely isotactic polymers except few cases ; where there are few exceptions like vanadium chloride plus trialkyl compound , which gives syndiotactic .
These are exception ; few exceptions , rather than a regular case .
Most cases , in almost exclusively all the cases it is the isotactic , which get formed .
Now , what is the mechanism what is the mechanism by which these polymerization happen and all the stereostacticity is maintained ?
There has been lot of studies and lot of mechanism proposed during last several decades .
And till there is no mechanism , you know , which has been which has been accepted by all the Chemists , Scientists working in this field .
And , so what happened ?
Still this is , this Zeigler - Natta polymerization is not completely understood .
So , what we will discuss here in this lecture , we will basically talk about two mechanisms .
One was proposed originally by Natta and which is a bimetallic mechanism .
And second , where majority of has actually accepted this mechanism which is a monometallic .
We will discuss these two in a minute .
Now , let us talk about first the bimetallic mechanism .
This was originally proposed by Natta himself .
I mean , this case the active side is an electron deficient .
The active side is electron deficient , bridged complex formed by chemisorption of the alkyl aluminum ; the electropositive alkyl , metal alkyl with a small ionic radius on the co - catalyst surface .
Let us first draw .
And this is the active side which is electron deficient than that formed by the chemisorption of the electropositive metal alkyl , which has a small ionic radius on the surface of the co - catalyst .
Now , once this is formed which is electron deficient , what happened ?
The monomer approaches this active side and coordinates .
So , we can write the next step .
Now instead of R , we are writing a propagating chain because that is the that is the steps get repeated .
So , we are not writing the first step , first addition .
We are writing any general addition of the next monomer , where P E is the polymer residue .
And , what happened ?
First , the monomer formation of complex between , formation of pi complex between the , with the nucleophilic olefin… So , they and this is electro deficient .
So , this approaches and forms a pi complex with the titanium center and which gives you… Then , next what happened ?
This is followed by partial ionization of this olefin as well as this alkyl bridge .
So , let us draw that .
And , there is a partial ionization of these alkyl bridge and also polarization of this monomers , which produce this intermediate , which then form a six membered ring transition state ; which basically form a six membered ring transition state .
You can draw yourself .
And so that is the six membered ring transition state .
And what happened now ?
There is a insertion of this new monomer ; this new monomer in the alkyl carbon linkage alkyl aluminum linkage and forming again the original titanium… which will now add to the next incoming monomer .
So , we have now .
So , insertion inserting this monomer , a new monomer in the aluminum alkyl aluminum carbon bond , which will form the regeneration of the bridge complex .
So , again what happened ?
The next monomer comes and get inserted here same mechanism and you get a linear poly olefins in this case .
Now , the second mechanism , which is a monometallic which is proposed by Cossee and Arlman .
Now this case , the vacant d - orbital present in the transition metal is the main source of catalytic activity .
And the chain growth occurs in titanium alkyl bond .
In this case , you have seen the chain growth , of course in aluminum bond .
In the monometallic case , we are talking about the chain insertion or the chain growth happening in the titanium carbon bond .
And in this case , the vacant d - orbital present in the transition metal in the main source of catalytic activity And as we said and as I said , that insertion happens in between the titanium and carbon bond .
So , if we consider the example , we given earlier .
Let us take the same example to get the or discuss the mechanism .
Now , this is the octahedrally coordinated crystal and because it has to maintain electron neutrality , the titanium or the surface is five coordinated titanium and have a vacant d - orbital .
And what happened at the beginning ?
At the active center , the formation happened by addition of a alkyl to this vacant d - orbital of five coordinated titanium three plus .
So , there is a… let me draw that .
Now , in this crystal as I said , this is a octahedrally coordinated .
So the surface , the titanium which is present at the surface is that is five coordinated titanium three plus and that has a vacant d - orbital .
We are writing this as a vacant d - orbital .
Now the initially what happened ?
This alkyl aluminum compound gets chemisorbed .
In that , vacant d - orbital and titanium gets alkylated .
And this now is a active center .
This initiates the polymerization .
We will let me drive the draw the mechanism in a separate page .
So , now we have this vacant orbital .
And these are all chlorine atoms , which are firmly embedded in the crystal of titanium alpha titanium chloride , again which we are writing the polymer residue here ; ‘ p ’ as a polymer residue .
Now , the monomer gets coordinated form pi complex with the vacant d - orbital .
Monomer gets coordinated to the vacant or empty d - orbital .
And then it forms a cyclic transition state .
So , it forms a four membered cyclic transition state .
And then , this new monomer gets inserted in the titanium carbon bond .
In earlier case , in bimetallic case we proposed… the mechanism was proposed where the new monomer is getting inserted in the aluminum carbon bond .
In this case , the new monomer is getting inserted in the titanium alkyl bond and regenerating the vacant d - orbital .
So , CH2 - CH X - CH2 - CHX - P .
So , now this is regenerated .
This active center is regenerated .
So , again one more monomer comes and the cyclic four membered cyclic transition formation takes place and the monomer gets inserted in the titanium carbon bond .
So , the polymer , linear polymerization takes place .
Now , let us discuss few features of Ziegler - Natta polymerization which is the mechanism , we just talked about the monometallic mechanism .
We all talked about that .
Let me just summarize one more time the features .
This is the important mechanism .
So we just , one more time let us discuss .
So , basically an octahedral vacancy of the d - orbital of titanium three plus is available to complex with the incoming monomer .
So , in this case there is a vacant d - rbital , which is available for complexation with the incoming monomer .
The orientation of the coordinate coordinated monomer is determined by the steric and electronic interaction with the ligands around the transition metals .
So , basically these are the ligands .
In this case chloride ; there , their interaction with the monomer ; steric and electronic interaction with the monomer actually determines the orientation of the coordination monomers .
And the propagation step is completed by insertion of the coordinated monomer in the metal , transition metal carbon bond as we discussed now .
And , the growing polymer chain is always attached to the transition metal .
Remember in case of bimetallic , the growing polymer chain was attached to the aluminum metal .
The orientation of the monomer as it inserts into the metal carbon bond , determines the configuration of the stereo center in the newly formed terminal unit .
You know , that is obvious ; what is the orientation of the monomer , when it gets complex and inserted , that orientation is determined by the stereo center , whether it will be isotactic or syndiotactic .
An isotactic polymer is always formed when it is preferred orientation for coordination is much lower than the other .
If one of the orientation is preferred , much preferred , if one of the orientation of this incoming monomer molecules is much preferred over the others , then what happened ?
The isotactic polymerization formation takes place .
So , now , we basically know these are the mechanism of Zeigler - Natta polymerization .
So , once initiation propagation is done , let us just glance through the possible mechanism by which we can terminate .
These Zeigler - Natta polymers or coordinated polymers get terminated .
And termination actually can happen in one of the three ways , like just , am just doing it a little fast .
There is nothing more to understand and it is just for information purpose .
Termination can happen ; beta hydride termination to the transition metal .
These hydride can get terminated and transferred to the transition metal forming a within end group in the polymer .
It can also get transferred to a monomer ; a monomer forming or forming this combination .
Another way of this polymers ; the Zeigler - Natta polymers get terminated which chain transferred to the group one to three metal alkyl metal like aluminum alkyl , we just discussed .
Basically if you take this example , propylene by titanium catalyst ; now , this can get transferred and you can have the chain get terminated .
The chain can terminate , the chain can transfer to compounds , added compounds , which are having active hydrogens .
We can write this generic structure of H - T with active hydrogen .
Then , this chain transfer can happen to this and the chain can get terminated .
Now , so this is all about the Zeigler - Natta polymerization .
And , this is the majority of the industrial polymers .
And Olefin industrial polymers was synthesized by this catalyst combination , Zeigler - Natta catalyst , till the discovery of metallocene catalyzed coordination polymerization .
Now in case of metalist , now what I have not talked till now that this is heterogeneous polymerization .
When you mix this alkyl aluminum and titanium chloride , the catalyst actually gets precipitate from the solution and when you add ethylene or propylene , it is a heterogeneous polymerization .
Now metallocene , you can actually do the polymerization in the homogeneous medium .
Metallocene polymerization can be done in solution in a homogeneous medium .
And the advantage is that at the end of the reaction , you can isolate the metallocene catalyst and then purify and reuse .
Now , what is metallocene polymerization ?
You can give a generalized structure of metallocene catalyst like this where or you can write a structural L L dash M t X 2 ; where L L dash are the ligands which can be equal .
But the L L dash can be same or different ; from different metallocenes like Cyclopentadienyl or Indenyl or Fluorenyl .
These are the few examples of the ligands which are present in the metallocenes .
For example is example of metallocenes , where you have two side ; two cyclopentadienyl coordinated with , attached with iron .
Generally , this metal used is a group four transition metal and in most cases it is zirconium and so zirconocene is what is mostly used in case of metallocenes polymers .
And X is a , most cases it is a chloride and sometimes it is CH 3 .
Now this require , this is like this titanium transition metal in Zeigler - Natta polymerization , this requires another co - catalyst like alkyl aluminum as is in the case of Zeigler - Natta polymerization .
But if we use alkyl aluminum , then what happened ?
The stereo specificity was not very high .
So , the most used co - catalyst is MAO which is a methylaluminoxane , which is network compound of this .
Now for example , let us take a metallocene polymerization .
This is a C p cyclopentadienyl , C p 2 say titanium chloride , inclination of MAO .
MAO does actually two things .
It is alkylate ; first it is alkylate , the metal and then abstract one halogen and form metal… ion and which generates one vacant or vital .
And , rest of the mechanism is same as we discussed in case of Zeigler - Natta polymerization in , like the insertion of polymer monomer molecules .
So , rest of the propagation and propagation follow the same similar mechanism as we discussed in case of Zeigler - Natta polymerization .
The advantage of metallocene polymerization is that , as I said that this can happen in a homogeneous condition and at the end of the polymerization it can isolate the monomer , isolate the catalyst and purify and then we reuse the catalyst one more time .
So , with this we have completed our discussion on Stereochemistry , Polymer Stereochemistry and coordination polymerization .
Now in this lecture itself , we basically completed our module on polymer synthesis .
What , till now what has happ…till this twenty four lectures was except the first few couple of lectures , where we give introduction about polymers .
Rest of that twenty two lectures or twenty one lectures , we discussed how to synthesize polymers .
Now , what are the different ways we can synthesize the polymers .
And I tried to give emphasize on the polymerization or synthetic process which are important , which are used very frequently or which are more important industrially .
And there are some specialized techniques as well , where which are used for specific techniques , special polymerization techniques .
For example , we solid - state polymerization , ring opening method , this is polymerization or group transfer polymerization .
Now , these are a not very common example of polymer synthesis or lots of industrial polymers are not used by this technique .
So , it can be covered in a specialized course on polymer synthesis itself .
So , in a general course like this of on Polymer Chemistry , we are not going in details on this type of specialized polymerization technique .
So , you are requested , if you are interested you can go and read a or consult a specialized book on polymer synthesis to know more about this polymerization techniques .
Now before we end this lecture , let us go through the commercial , a few commercial coordination polymers .
And you can for example , high density polyethylene which has low branching , high crystallinity , high density .
You can actually use these coordination polymers to make high molecular weight , high density polyethylene or ultra - high molecular polyethylene .
You can make low density polyethylene as well by copolymerizing with slight amount of one olefin , such as one butylene or one hexylene along very slight amount with ethylene that , we will basically introduce to do branches and reduce the crystallization , increase reduce the density as well .
And , another very important point polymers which is made industrially by this technique is as we discussed several times is the polypropylene .
And as we said that , stereo regular polypropylene like isotactic polypropylene and syndiotactic polymers are useful to synthesize .
So , with this we come to end in this module of polymer synthesis .
In next lecture onwards , what we will do ?
we will study the characterizes process , characterization of process , how after making this polymers what are the ways we will characterize and even with the polymers , which we have learnt for last twenty four lecture .
How we can we have learned how to synthesize the polymers .
Last time we were discussing about the application of the immobilized enzymes and we had mentioned that the enzymes find applications in a variety of situations and we dealt with the applications of immobilized enzymes as industrial biocatalyst in process industries .
Two major sectors of applications of immobilized enzymes are analytical applications and also their application in the therapeutics for the treatment of diseases in human beings and both the applications are also particularly important or in contrast to the application as industrial catalyst lies in the effect that you require much more purified systems and the use of high value enzymes in their applications unlike in the case of industrial biocatalyst where mostly we were dealing with relatively lesser valued enzymes and the two applications on analytical applications and therapeutics require relatively high value enzymes and in a higher purified state .
Just to take up the analytical applications the variety of applications that have been reported can be classified into four different types : the first is automated analysis procedures by combining immobilized enzymes with various analytical tools .
We come across variety of analytical situations whether in the area of research or even in the area of clinical analysis where the samples are analyzed in large numbers and be required to use very specific reactions that can be catalyzed by enzymes .
One way is as you must have done in your laboratory class the use of glucose oxidase for example for assay of glucose .
The use of soluble enzyme may be fine if you have to analyze let us say couple of samples three or four .
But in situation where the sample to be analyzed are in very large number and very often such instances are met in hospitals and in clinical laboratories where few hundreds of samples everyday are encountered and use of soluble enzyme may be some times uneconomical .
Similarly in research also a student might be analyzing the similar sample hundreds of them over a day and just to get his results .
So in those cases the analytical procedures can be automated by combining the immobilized enzymes , instead of soluble enzyme , with a standard analytical device .
It could be a spectrophotometer , it could be a fluorospectrophotometer , it could be as simple as pH meter .
So any analytical simple analytical tool can be combined and used .
A very simple example of this approach was reported by Hicks and Updike way back in 66 .
Another point is the bulk of the analytical applications were the earliest uses of immobilized enzymes .
In fact their application in process industry was adopted much later than they were used in analytical applications and that means the cost implications are much more severe in analytical sections .
The setup is like this that the given sample in which a chemical species to be analyzed is passed through an immobilized enzyme column a very small column and here in this reference it was glucose or lactic acid determination based on glucose oxidase or lactate dehydrogenase and they were immobilized on polyacrolymide gel and packed in a very small column and the substrate was fed at 0.8 ml per minute and then this is passed through a delay line so that you provide a reaction time and a coloured reagent is added here and after that in a spectrophotometer , a photometric cell which is connected to a system , the reaction passes the and color developed is monitored .
You can also have some standard solutions and this is a two way valve whereby you can either put a standard solution and measure observant in the photometer or you can put the actual cell and on the other side you have a buffer or a control solution which also passes through a delay line and a different photometer of the same wavelength and to empty the photometer tube pulses are used so that in a pulse mode the tubes are filled and emptied while the flow is continuous for the photometer measures in a pulse mode and the materials are removed .
In fact two of the systems which were very early reported were glucose by glucose oxidase and lactic acid by lactate dehydrogenase .
This is the kind of reaction that takes place in the immobilized enzyme column .
The lactic acid sample itself is mixed with NAD solution and pyruvic acid is formed with reduced NAD and reduced NAD is then oxidized with a dye DPI and then the NAD gets regenerated that means that is oxidized and reduced dye is colourless .
This DPI is blue and this is colourless .
So difference in the absorbance is related to the concentration of the lactic acid .
On the other hand , in the case of glucose it is glucose to gluconic acid plus hydrogen peroxide and hydrogen peroxide acts as an oxidizing agent and it oxidizes the DPI to coloured product which is blue in color and is measured .
A large number of other dyes also have been reported and this dye is only just to facilitate the measurement of the colour .
Two other very interesting examples also came in almost during the same time in 64 and 65 .
Riesel and Katchalski in Israel reported the use of urease immobilized on diazotized amino acid copolymer used for the determination of urea in urine or serum and also for the removal of urea from body fluids .
The urea system in urine samples is used today in many large hospitals on a commercial scale where the requirement is almost thousands samples in a day .
So instead of employing number of analysts they have an auto analyzer in which the immobilized column can carry out the job and almost thousand samples can be analyzed using a single cartage of immobilized enzyme and the cost can be saved effectively .
The other report is by Gilbault and Kramer in 65 .
They did for cholinesterase which was entrapped in a starch matrix and it was used for continuous detection of anti - cholinesterase .
This is an example not really of a metabolite or some kind of a substrate or the product but it was just like an environmental analysis where the presence of certain cholinesterase inhibitors present in either effluents or nearby as a result of pollution were monitored continuously using an immobilized cholinesterase entrapped in a starch matrix plus a fluorescence spectrophotometer because the product ultimately gives a fluorescence and the change in fluorescence as a result of inhibitor present .
That means florescence decreases and by that one can monitor continuously and the measurement of florescence gives you a direct indication of the concentration of inhibitor in the feed stream .
The second class of analytical applications is enzyme electrodes .
Although it is listed as second it has become commercially a very , very important sector of analytical tool .
What is an enzyme electrode ?
In general we call it a biosensor , an analytical device .
A very crude definition could include it as a hybrid device where a biological recognition molecule or a cell or cell component is integrated with a physical or chemical detector .
We know the transducer to utilize the selective analysis of a biochemical species in a sample .
So there are three distinct segments one is the biological unit which is integrated with a transducer and the third is anylate .
These three systems , the biological unit , transducer and anylate have to have a linkage .
That means if this anylate has to recognize this biological unit there must be an affinity between the two .
Secondly the substrate or the product of the reaction which comes out as a result of this interaction must be able to generate a measurable parameter which can be measured by transducer in quantitative terms so that it can be related with either the substrate concentration or some species in the sample .
Anylate means that chemical species which is to be analyzed say for example you want to analyze sugar some glucose in blood ; glucose is the anylate .
The chemical species which needs to be analyzed is anylate .
In other words the concept is very simple and a large variety of biological units have been used to prepare biosensors .
As far as we are concerned you will be stressing more on enzymes as biological units but other than enzyme you can also use microbial cells , plant cells , animal cells , cell membrane , Lectins or antibodies depending upon the anylate .
The purpose is that the chemical species to be analyzed must have a specific recognition for the biological unit and the type of transducers that are very commonly used are amperometric or potentiometric electrodes and the recent year developments have been in the area of field effect transistors , thermisters .
But still on commercial level amperometric and potentiometric transducers are the common tools that are used in bulk .
Anylate is the chemical species which is to be monitored in the sample .
Say for example if you want to monitor urea in urine samples ; urea is the anylate , urine is a sample the fluid to be analyzed and the biological unit which is recognizing that analate is the material either an enzymes or a cell which has the some affinity for that molecule and you need a physical transducer which can sense either the substrate or the product or any other signal which is generated through the reaction .
I will come to that later .
To illustrate schematically the same concept of a biosensor I have taken here a substrate molecule to be analyzed in any given system .
This is immobilized enzyme .
The substrate molecule recognizes the enzyme species present on the immobilized enzyme .
There can be a membrane through which the product or any other species which comes out as a result of reaction passes through and approaches transducer , an analytical device which generates a signal that can be monitored .
It can be in the form of a current ; it can be in the form of potential difference ; it can be the form of temperature change and variety of signals can be generated and that depends on the type of ……… producing .
The basic concept is you have to choose an appropriate combination of biological and transducing elements that means choose a biological agents ; we are emphasizing on immobilized enzymes which will recognize the anylate .
Secondly convert the recognition process into a physico - chemical change which either directly or indirectly generates the current .
In the electrical circuit current is a very easily measurable parameter and just to make it suitable for repeated use we need to immobilize the bio element .
Theoretically the system can be used in a soluble form also but just to make it a continuously usable system the bio element is immobilized .
What kinds of electrodes are used usually ?
Take for example pH electrode in a laboratory .
pH electrode is a transducer , one of the transducers which can be used in the case of an enzyme electrode .
What you simply need to do is at the tip of the electrode you need to insert by some mechanism an immobilized enzyme layer so that when you dip that electrode into a sample liquid , the sample comes in contact with immobilized enzyme layer usually in the form of thin film and the reaction takes place ; the product goes through and it is sensed by the pH electrode .
pH electrode is a potentiometric transducer .
It generates the potential and that potential is measured and calibrated in the form of pH change and that can be used simply .
Similarly a number of ion selective electrodes which also function in the same principle of potentiometric transducer can be used as transducing element .
In principle the enzyme is bound to ion selective electrode that will detect the presence of a substrate or product .
That means if the substrate is ionisable it can be measured or it can measure the product of the enzyme catalyzed reaction .
The transducer measures the potential difference between a reference and sensing electrode .
We are not doing any manipulation with the transducer ; we use the commercially available transducers .
It could be a …. .. electrode what you use in the fermentor for measurement of dissolved oxygen because that is amperometric transducer ; it measures current .
On the other hand a simple pH meter or an ammonium ion electrode or carbon dioxide electrode they are potentiometric transducers .
No that mechanism can be developed , but it should be in proximity with the electrode .
That means the tip should be next to the sensing site of the electrode .
I will illustrate how we do that but the basic principle is that it should be in the proximity of the sensing site of the transducer .
One can manipulate and develop number of the strategies like an amperometric …. .. type dissolved oxygen electrode what you use in the case of fermentation fluids for measurement of dissolved oxygen .
They are based on platinum cathode and a silver anode which is immersed in saturated KCl which is separated from the test solution by a PTFE membrane .
That means at the tip of the transducer you have a PTFE membrane so that the sample in which the analysis has to be done for dissolved oxygen is separated from KCl solution because that should not get mixed and a potential of about 0.5 to 0.8 volts , a constant value , is applied because this constant voltage applied will determine the calibration of the current which is generated as a result of dissolved oxygen when it comes in contact with the electrode .
The potential of 0.5 to 0.8 volts is usually applied across the electrode and the current generated is proportional to the concentration of the substrate in the sample .
The current generated is reflected by dissolved oxygen concentration because on the cathode it is the oxygen which takes up the protons generated on the anode .
This dissolved oxygen is a function or is a parameter which is participating in the reaction .
In enzymatic reactions usually there will be oxidoreductases , redox reactions if they consume oxygen or give out oxygen a difference in the dissolved oxygen can be used to measure the substrate .
At the electrode is measured dissolved oxygen but the consumption of dissolved oxygen in the fluid is a result of enzymatic reaction .
For example consider glucose .
Glucose plus oxygen will give you gluconic acid and in the sample when you bring the glucose sample in proximity of the electrode which has the glucose oxidase as enzyme deposited on it the enzyme will react with the glucose in the presence of oxygen and consume oxygen .
There will be a fall in the oxygen concentration , dissolved oxygen concentration which will be monitored by the electrode and this fall in dissolved oxygen concentration under steady state will be proportional to the substrate concentration .
Just like in the earlier automated devices you can have small immobilized enzyme columns and link it to the photometer .
That is possible but again to use it in terms of convenience use of pH electrode is very simple .
You just dip in the solution and get the result , output whereas if you have to really set up an auto analyzer it will have a full fledged setup with all tubing and you will have a reaction period and all those things and ultimately you will end up in a very cumbersome system .
Any analytical device in the form of an electrode , physical device which can be usually calibrated in terms of the concentration of the sample it is much easy to handle .
It ’ s only convenient .
You can have either way ; also you can put your enzyme into a column and pass it through a spectrophotometer ; that can be automated ; no doubt about it .
The three parameters which are important in the case of an enzyme electrode are selectivity .
The selectivity is a function which is offered to it by enzyme because the enzyme has to be chosen which is highly selective for and that choice is important because if you are not able to choose very selective enzyme the analysis may not be very specific .
Then sensitivity ; Sensitivity is a function of the Km value of the enzyme that means the range of analysis that it can perform that will depend on the Km value of the enzyme .
The third and probably , from the operational point of view , very important is stability because we must be able to use the same immobilized enzyme coating for a number of samples so that it is stable over a long period of time plus reproducible .
Usually immobilized enzyme is supplied in the form of sandwich between the membranes so that they can be replaced on the tip .
This is a picture of a typical enzyme electrode which we used in our own laboratory .
It is a dissolved oxygen electrode ; simple one showing different components .
You have a gold cathode , silver anode and Teflon membrane at the tip ; that is the main electrode has a Teflon membrane on the tip .
We put another dialysis membrane over this Teflon membrane and this separates the enzyme which is immobilized in the form of a thin film and particularly in this case study which I was referring to , the immobilized enzyme is cellulose acetate membrane .
Just to provide a support it is inserted between dialysis tubes which is permeable to small molecular weight compound like glucose freely and which is put on this Teflon membrane which is already present in the dissolved oxygen electrode .
The other system what you see is a sleeve .
This sleeve is just to insert the enzyme membrane on to the electrode as a as a ……… .
so that you insert on the tip the enzyme membrane .
Here you see a bigger view .
You can have for example glucose measurement .
You have a silver anode and platinum cathode , a plastic membrane which is supposed to protect anode and cathode which separates the fluid from the internal fluid and after that we put an enzyme gel layer .
You can have some kind of sleeve which holds this layer .
Like in our case we had reverse sleeve which is covered over the tip of the electrode so that the film remains intact on the electrode and it is separate because being inserted in the dialysis bed , it is separated from the PTFE membrane also and it also provides the analytical molecule to permeate through it and come in proximity with the enzyme .
No ; enzyme is not leaving direct contact with the anode and cathode .
Anode and cathode only come in picture with either the substrate or the product which is a result of the enzyme reaction like for example here you see the second case which is for L - amino acid oxidase you have a simple glass electrode just like pH electrode .
They have put an enzyme solution in an ultra filtration membrane or cellophane membrane or you can say dialysis bed which is closed at the bottom and the electrode is dipped into it .
That has been supported by ‘ O ’ rings just like we have put a sleeve in the earlier case .
You put ‘ O ’ rings so that the dialysis bed which contains the enzyme is in proximity of the enzyme and it can be used for measurement systems .
We are indirectly measuring glucose via measurement of dissolved oxygen .
The dissolved oxygen electrode will measure dissolved oxygen only ; it cannot measure glucose directly .
But the glucose concentration results in either production or consumption of oxygen as a result of the enzyme reaction and that is the purpose .
Large number of enzyme electrodes have been prepared and listed here are the ones which are commercially available .
There are many other experimental electrodes which have been made and reported in the literature .
For example glucose is the most commonly used electrode and the immobilization method polyacrylamide gel ; oxygen electrode is electrode used and the concentration range it can measure is of the order of ten to the power of minus five to ten to the power of minus four molar .
I like you to see the sensitivity of the measurement which is probably much higher than any physical or chemical measurement system at this concentration level .
That is we are talking in the micro molar range .
In the case of urea , urease is the enzyme , immobilization method is polyacrylamide gel and ammonium ion electrode is used , ion selective potentiometric electrode and the range is one to ten micro molar .
In the case of cholesterol , cholesterol oxidase , collagen membrane and oxygen electrode is the measurement device .
In all reactions which are redox reactions oxygen electrodes are used and if any other ion selective measurement has to be done then the potentiometric electrometer is used .
For urea , urease is the enzyme , ultra filtration membrane CO two electrode , an ion selective electrode .
Then penicillin measurement using an enzyme penicillinase which hydrolyzes penicillin using a glass electrode , this can also be measured .
The advantage is in an industry if they have to monitor the penicillin concentration of their bath on an online basis any chemical measurement will take time .
The report may take two hour .
Whereas if the plant operator has an electrode in his pocket and he takes a sample and dips into it , the control becomes very easy .
He can immediately take a decision to either switch on or switch off or terminate ; whatever decision has to be taken on the plan and in those cases such systems are very , very useful .
Another analytical device based on immobilized enzyme is enzyme thermisters .
The enzyme thermisters are based on the measurement of temperature difference of the reaction liquid in an exothermic biochemical reaction .
Mind it that we are talking of exothermic biochemical reaction .
Many of the enzyme reactions which are highly isothermal , I am just comparing the two , although they are known to be in all broad range as isothermal reactions they will have some value of ?
H . So those which have slightly higher ?
H value among enzyme reactions they can be used for enzyme thermisters because they will induce a change in the temperature .
Although temperature change as you will notice is much smaller .
This involves the use of semi conductor material showing a large resistance change with temperature .
So measurement of temperature is based on the change in resistance of a semiconductor material as a function of temperature .
In semiconductors , the expression which relates the resistance with reference to temperature T one and T two , resistance changes and all those material and semiconductors are known to have a high change in resistance as a function of temperature and they are used here as the sensing device .
So thermister is nothing else but a semiconductor material which is connected to a circuit which measures impedance and if that is put at the tip of the effluent stream of the immobilized enzyme reaction you can use it for measurement of temperature .
In practice a well insulated immobilized enzyme column is used .
You take a very fine small column and insulate it .
The most difficult part of the enzyme thermister is the very high order of insulation required because the temperature which we are measuring is probably a fraction of the integer ; some times as low as 0.1º centigrade , one hundredth of a centigrade ; that is the kind of temperature change we are talking about to ensure very high order of insulation and the effectiveness of this system depends on the quality of insulation one can provide .
The thermister is mounted at the extreme end of the fluid .
For example this is the material column and you feed the sample through a pump and you have a small heat exchanger which maintains in a very controlled range the inlet temperature and the outlet temperature is monitored by a thermister which is installed at the outlet end and this is connected to measurement circuit and measures the impedance .
The ? T is indicated by a change in impedance and the range of temperature measurement for different enzymes lies in 0.004 to 1º degree centigrade .
Higher this change is the system can be more effective usually it has been noted that only those enzymes which can generate a temperature change more than 0.1º centigrade are effective .
0.004 is a …… size but you need some reliably measurable amount of temperature change .
The suitability of enzyme thermister depends on the enthalpy changes associated with the biochemical reaction .
More exothermic the reaction we are handling , the system can be more effective .
If you look into some values of ?
H in the case of catalase , it is 100.4 kilo joules per mole .
This is probably one of the highest ?
H value in the case of enzymatic reactions and this gives almost about a temperature change of 0.2 to 0.3 degree centigrade which can be very easily monitored .
Glucose oxidase 80 kilo joules per mole ; hexokinase 27.6 kilo joules per mole ; lactate dehydroginase another good system 62.1 and urease with the urea only 6.6 .
As a matter of fact the urease , this system is usually not very effective and the first four ones are considered to be very effective and the system is not commercialized but in many laboratories they have been tested , used and reported .
The same anylate whatever substrate concentration , the change of temperature which is measured in terms of change in resistance is related to the change of substrate concentration .
This is per mole ; per mole of substrate consumed means so much of ……. .. Just like any chemical reaction you have a ?
H value .
Then the third area of application of enzyme , analytical application I am referring to , is the structural analysis of bio macromolecules .
You must be familiar with the primary structural determination of proteins .
Usually we take a protein , hydrolyze it by using some enzymes or chemical means by acid or alkali and monitor the different amino acids that are produced .
The same job can be done by immobilized enzyme in a more controlled way and you can have controlled hydrolysis .
The …… advantage , the kind of problem that is faced in the case of classical analysis is the removal of the hydrolyzing agent that is acid or alkali or even the soluble enzyme .
Removal from the sample is very tedious task and also causes in some cases for example tryptophan , it is destroyed by alkali .
So alkaline hydrolysis , which is very commonly used for determination of primary structure does not measure tryptophan .
But if you use a column of immobilized enzyme for a controlled hydrolysis of a protein sample , first thing no amino acid will be destroyed .
They will also liberate the D - amino acids if there are , which are very uncommon occurrences in proteins can also be analyzed .
The basic concept is that we can analyze amino acid composition of proteins by using immobilized proteases or base composition of nucleic acids if we use immobilized phosphatases .
If you take the phosphoesterases and immobilize them , then you can have the base composition because the hydrolysis will yield and then you can have a controlled hydrolysis and see the sequence .
The principle remains the same as in the case of soluble enzyme but the preparation of the analytical samples becomes very easy because then you don ’ t have to separate the hydrolyzing agents , the catalyst .
You can simply either filter it off or centrifuge and your sample is ready for analysis .
A major advantage is in cases where sample contains amino acids that decompose by acid or alkali such as tryptophan and detection of D - amino acids .
In fact in many cases in the chemical analysis detection of D - amino acid is difficult because it gets destroyed .
The other analytical application sector was as a therapeutic agent and with development in the availability of different enzymes and particularly the understanding of molecular basis of deceases the use of enzymes as therapeutic agents is by and large increasing .
The conventional use of enzymes in therapeutic has been the use of proteases .
For variety of situations that range from digestion aid to even treatment of certain deceases which involve the availability of one of the enzyme or removal of some metabolite from the body .
A very large range of application sectors in the therapy have been known with soluble enzymes .
But the use of soluble enzymes has certain very serious problems and the problems are listed here : one is that the enzyme has a higher molecular mass , a very large molecule protein and impermeability through biological membranes .
In fact the efficacy of any drug or a therapeutic agent depends on its permeability through biological membranes and even the efficacy of a chemical drug will depend on it ’ s ability to permeate through the biological membranes and reach to the site .
So the larger the molecule as the enzymes are it posses serious problem in the permeability and the most toughest biological membrane through which the drug has to permeate is brain membranes .
As a matter of fact almost all drugs which are required to be given for action at brain as the site the concentrations are very high almost 4 to eight times more that of the same drug if it is used at some other site in the body .
Say for example steroids .
If they have to be administered for some inflammation at some site leg or hand , you can give a very small dose ; it will reach the site and treat the patient .
But if the inflammation is in the brain at least ten fold concentration of the drug is required to be administered because lesser than that will not even permeate to the brain membrane .
So giving it will be useless it go to all over the body excepting brain .
If you give higher dose you end up in another problem of side effects because there is no drug which is free of side effects .
You are taking it to cure the decease but slowly you are also getting exposed to certain side effects .
So therefore the high molecular mass which results into impermeability through the biological membranes is a major problem .
Then another problem is instability to denaturation in biological fluids and proteolytic attack .
Ultimately the drug has to reach into the biological fluids , save blood or let ’ s say it has to reach to stomach .
The fluids have very strong conditions for example the fluid in the stomach will have a very low pH .
There might be certain inhibitors present for the enzyme which might reduce the rate of reaction or there might be some proteolytic enzymes present and they can inactivate the enzyme protein .
Any therapeutic device must take care of these problems if it has to be effective .
That means one should ensure what is the site of action required ?
what is the biological view there ?
What is the chemical view there ?
What are the inhibitors present ?
What is the pH ?
What is the temperature and then only the enzyme function can be ensured .
Third is antigenic properties hypersensitibity and immunological reactions .
Enzyme being a protein or rather a foreign protein to the body , the body is equipped with antibodies to generate immunological reactions and they can also be problematic and infact the administration of any enzyme for therapeutic application must overcome these problems .
Number of approaches has been used to overcome this problem and some enzymes had become easily admissible .
I like to illustrate only one example which has become quite interesting say for example in the case of patients who suffer from partial kidney failure .
That means kidney is probably one of the excellent examples of a filtration system , highly specific filtration system in the body .
I don ’ t think any other filtration device is available which is so specific and lasting .
Still in some cases the partial failure takes place and the kidney is not able to filter out or remove urea .
So the urea concentration in the blood stream increases and it can cause many metabolic problems and it is ultimately fatal .
There are other chemical treatments but the last resort is to put on a dialysis system .
That means dialysis is something like an artificial organ ; it ’ s like an artificial kidney that you take out the blood and put it in an extra ……. .. .
This is the living body and the blood passes through the dialysis membrane , a dialysis device in which the blood is dialyzed against a dialysate , usually a buffer .
The quantity of buffer that has to be administered or that has to be passed in the conventional dialysis unit is 100 to 300 lts .
This is the range .
In cases where the concentration of urea is much larger in the blood stream you may have to require more fluid to pass and because of this large volume required for dialysis usually a specific patient has to be hospitalized and the whole setup of a hospital has to be used for dialysis .
The dialysate removes the metabolites , urea in this case and the urea level in the blood is brought down , then the conventional way .
This system which has been followed in the past has lot of problems .
One is that the patient after sometime fails to respond to dialysis , if the concentration goes very high the volume of the dialysate required is very large .
The frequency required is very high that means initially he starts a dialysis once in a month and he may end up in daily dialysis .
Putting one daily for dialysis in hospital is also very difficult task because ultimately what you are doing is you are circulating the whole of his body blood through a dialysis system ; it ’ s a very tedious system if we look at and you are just putting a secondary circulation system of blood which already exist in the body .
The alternate to that is use of immobilized urease and this is an example of an artificial organ which is commercialized which is available commercially and with such a system a patient doesn ’ t have to go hospital because the volume of dialysate they require is only about a liter which he can safely install at the site of his bed in the house and use himself .
The principle remains the same .
You take blood in ; the dialyser unit is little compact same dialysis bag only thing is much smaller because as soon as the urea comes in the dialysate instead of being thrown out it is passed through an immobilized enzyme column , the one which is shown here as microcapsule in which ion exchange resin and the enzyme have been immobilized in microcapsules .
So the urea which comes out in the dialysate is hydrolyzed to ammonia ; ammonia is absorbed by the ion exchange resin .
Carbon dioxide is not allowed its not bothered about because carbon dioxide even if it reaches in the blood the body has a capacity to exit out to lungs assuming that the lungs are functioning properly of the patient .
So carbon dioxide can be left out ; but ammonia cannot be sent back to the body and ammonia is removed by ion exchange resins and other metabolite which are generated if any in the blood sample they are taken care by activated carbon and the body fluid of the blood through a system is then sent back into the patient valve .
The advantage here is from the practical point of view instead of dialysate volume using about of the order of three hundred liters we are talking of one or two liters of dialysate and because you are regenerating the dialysate by removing the urea formed in the system and that kind of system is commercially available .
In the box , in an expanded view of the column in which the microcapsule contains the enzyme and the ion exchange resin the reaction takes place ; urea gets converted into carbon dioxide and ammonia .
Carbon dioxide is led off in the blood stream for the body to take care and the ammonia is taken care by the ion exchange beads and the size approximately of these microcapsules is the order of two hundred to eight hundred microns ; very fine microcapsules almost like a tiny set and they are packed and this system is obtainable .
Besides the use of immobilized enzyme as industrial catalyst , the immobilized enzymes has a major role to play even for analytical devices and for therapeutic purposes .
I must stress again that at least these two applications have lesser implication as for the economic systems .
I think the issue of economics is very , very important in their use in the process industries .
For therapeutic purposes economics is secondary because primary is the ……… system , the safety of the system .
Analytical systems also because the quantity of enzyme required are so low that probably the economics rather is always in favor because you save tremendously in the cost of labour .
As I mentioned to you that I have seen myself the analysis in atleast one of the hospitals in Sweden almost about thousand samples in a day done by an auto analyzer using immobilized enzyme and which would have required at least ten persons and you are aware that the hiring of the person is the last thing , at least in the western world .
They will try to replace any person with a machine ; that is cheaper and the cost of analysis works out to be very cheap if you compare with hiring a person and also more reliable .
The human error is by and large avoided .
I will stop here .
Let us continue our discussion on step growth polymerization .
Now , before we come to this lectures topic , let us just recapitulate what we have learnt in last lecture .
In last lecture , we have completed the kinetics of step polymerization and we have seen what is after looking at the kinetic expression .
We are convinced that in for polymer chemistry , this life is little difficult compared to organic chemistry .
If we talk about the utility of conversion for an organic chemist which deals with the small molecules in 98 percent conversion may be good enough , but for a polymer chemist , 98 percent conversion might give you only a degree of polymerization of 50 .
So , if you have to improve or increase their molecular weight , you have to take your reaction for longer and longer which makes it more difficult for a polymer chemist .
We also in that kinetic polymerization proved the theory of equal reactivity of functional group .
Then we went on and studied how the degrees of polymerization would vary with equilibrium constant in a closed system , and we found that the importance of equilibrium constant .
In that case , if you want to build high molecular weight in a closed system without removing the condensate out of the polymerization medium , then your k value , the value of the equilibrium constant has to be quite high to build a descent enough molecular weight which is that is why , it is never practiced .
The step polymerization is never practiced in a closed system is always done where you take out the condensate from the reaction medium and in continuation , we found that we understood that it is not always possible to take out 100 percent of the condensate which is produced , getting produced in the reaction .
So , we found the quantity of relations between the amount of condensate present at the end of the reaction with the degrees of polymerization in that along with its relational equilibrium constant , and we have seen that unless we have a quite high value of equilibrium constant , we have to go down the residual value of the condensate to a very low level to build a higher molecular weight .
If we cannot take out the condensate from the reaction medium , such a way , such a high level , so that the residual level of the condensate in the polymerized medium is low , for whatever reason .
Then we have to design the monomers such a way that the equilibrium constant is pushed up or the reactivity increases .
In that case , we can afford to leave more amount of condensate molecules in the polymerization medium in order to build high enough molecular weight .
We also studied what are the strategies for controlling molecular weight in a step polymerization and two recommended strategies are either , one should use a slight excess of the one of the two bi - functional monomer or a slight amount of a chain stopper which is nothing but a mono - functional group .
Now , what we planned to study in this lecture is continuation of the strategies and now , we in this lecture would quantify the relation .
That means , how much excess we use , the term slight excess , so how much excess you should use for your target molecular weight or how much mono - functional monomer you should have for a target molecular weight .
And then we also learnt molecular distribution among the chains which are formed in step polymerization , and then calculate MW and poly dispersed index and then at the end , we will compare between cyclization and linear polymerization .
So , let us begin with where we left in the last lecture .
Now , we know that degrees of polymerization , the first degrees of polymerization is given by the number of monomer group or functional groups at the beginning number of molecules at the beginning and by the number of groups at time t .
Now , let us consider a case where we have this system AA and BB with slight excess of BBB .
This is present in slight excess .
So , define a ratio which is imbalanced ratio or which is the moles of AA number of BB .
Now , r is defined in such a way that it is always less than equals to 1 .
It will never be more than 1 .
So , the monomer which is present , this should come as a denominator , so that r is always less than equals to 1 .
So , what you need to find ?
The molecular weight or degrees of polymerization .
We have to find N 0 and N .
If N A is the number of functional group present at the beginning at t is equal to 0 and N B is a number of functional groups of B present at t is equal to 0 , so what are the total number of a molecule at t is equal to 0 ?
Total number of molecule is N A by 2 because each molecules has two functional groups and total number of BB molecules is given by N B by 2 .
Now , N B is r is N A by N B .
So , N B is N A by r 1 over 2 .
So , total molecules at the beginning at t is equal to 0 or N 0 which is N 0 is N A by 2 number of AA molecules plus number of BB molecules N A bar r 1 by 2 , which gives plus 1 by r .
Clear ? Now , we have to find out this .
We know N 0 .
Now , we have to find out N which is the number of molecules at time t at some reaction if conversion is P .
So , number of a molecules reacted a functional group reacted is P into N A .
So , number of B group reacted again .
Each A will react with one A will react with one B .
So , number of BB group will react , will be same as number of A group .
Is it clear ?
Because conversion is defined the fraction of functional group has reacted , in this case , A present in a small amount .
So , we will consider AA number of A groups reacted is fraction in the total present , initially P into P multiplied by N A .
Now , each A group will react with one B group .
So , total number of B groups will react also this .
So , how many of A is remaining ?
So , remaining number of A group is earlier what N A .
Now , it is N A into P .
It gives N A 1 minus P .
How many B groups remaining ?
Earlier was N B minus P N A .
Again , N B is N A by r P N A which gives us N A 1 by r minus P .
So , this is the number of A groups remaining and this is the number of BB group , B group remaining .
So , total number of functional groups remaining unreacted is sum of these two .
So , total number of functional groups unreacted is summation of these two .
I can take both together 1 minus P plus 1 r minus P gives us N A 1 plus 1 by r minus 2 P .
Now , each of these are the number of functional groups unreacted .
So , how many molecules will be unreacted left over ?
Each molecule has two functional groups at two ends .
So , how many of number of groups , number of molecules present now ?
So , N which is the number of molecules left over , each molecules which is left over now in the polymerization medium which have two functional groups .
So , if you divide the total number of functional groups unreacted by 2 , it will give you the number of molecules left .
So , N is N A by 2 , 1 plus 1 by r minus 2 p .
So , x n bar is N 0 by N , which means N A by 2 1 plus 1 by r divided by N A by 2 , 1 plus 1 r minus 2 P which leads to 1 plus r 1 plus r minus 2 r P .
So , that is the expression which relates the number of average molecular weight with r , which is ratio of the moles of two bi - functional monomers present in the system at the beginning , where r is defined such a way that it is always less than equals to 1 and P is the conversion which is defined as the fraction of the functional groups which is present in a smaller quantity as reacted .
If in this case , A is the functional group present in a smaller quantity , the fraction of a group which has reacted is defined as the conversion .
Now , if I plot this , how does it look ?
So , it will look something like this , where this is the direction of PP is 1 in this case , and the other curves are for lower P which means for a given r , you take any of the r here .
As you increase P , molecular weight goes up which is expected and for a given P for any of this , if you consider any of this curve .
As you increase r , if you go close to tri - symmetric , you will increase the molecular weight .
So , the ideal scenario of working is somewhere here , where your r is close to 1 and P is close to 1 .
That will give you the highest molecular you can achieve .
If in any of these two factors , if r is somewhere here , then the matter what is a conversion level ?
You cannot reach high molecular weight .
It will stop here same as if your P is low .
So , like this curve , no matter what is your r , you can only reach up to this level .
So , to A for a successful step polymerization , successful by mean in A by successful , I mean to build a high molecular at you have to have a condition , where r is also close to 1 .
So , as P is 1 , if you have some molecular weight in target , you can use this formula and you can complete the reaction in such a way , now r is the ratio of the functional group of the two bi - functional monomers .
So , you need to know the concentration of each monomers very well .
Now , how do you know ?
You can only know the concentration of each other , the moles of each of the monomers and the functional groups if they are pure enough .
If there are impurities present in your monomers , then you do not know , you are not sure what is the actual mole fraction or mole of the functional groups which restricts that you must have very pure monomer in order to get a successful step polymers and also at the same time , your reactor should be high enough , so that you can take out your condensate such extreme that you can push your conversion up to P .
Now , sometimes it is difficult to quantify the P where you cannot take out the halicut giving the reaction and determine the functional group present .
So , by which you can determine the conversion .
So , what is typically done ?
You do your reaction best possible way and that is your limitation .
So , that is the maximum you can go and if your reactions system is good , your reactor is good , your vacuum system is good .
Then you can hope that you will be , your P would be close to 1 .
Then you can control your molecular weight and you can target your molecular weight by adjusting the ratio between two monomer or the fixing the value of r .
If you consider P as 1 , if you make your P is 1 , then x n would be 1 plus r , 1 minus r .
This is typically done .
You do your reaction best possible way as best you can do and hope that P is close to 1 and you can choose r in at the beginning , so that you can target x n accordingly and there is another case when r is 1 x n would give us back the original equation where we started with one is to one ratio of the two functional , two bi - functional groups .
Now , there is a second strategy we discussed .
Type 2 that was earlier was type 1 .
Type 2 where we said that we can control the molecular weight by adding a mono - functional group , mono - functional compound or monomer substance whatever .
Now , let us take A , as situation where we have saved AAAA B type molecules lose some excess B or a AA type BB type plus some excess B .
You can use the expression which we will get it for the simple , any of this simple scenario where you have B or AA BB .
One is to one plus these things plus some mono - functional monomer which is chain stopper .
In that case also , you can use the same expression which we got in the last page .
In that case also , you can use the same expression .
Only difference is that in this case , r is defined as N A plus N B plus 2 N B dash .
The same expression can be used for this scenario as well .
What is scenario where you have either A or D or 1 is to 1 A B plus some excess d .
In this case , the dash is the mole fact , number of moles of the molecular mono - functional group having B .
You might question what is the origin of these two ?
That is because this has same effect as excess BB .
These are same effect of a x is presence of a excess bi - functional monomer to equate these two is added compensate this .
So , now , with this formula , you can use , you can target a molecular weight .
You can start with a one is to one A and B .
These two monomers , A and B and then add slight amount of this mono functional group and target a certain molecular weight using this expression , where r is defined as this .
What is the advantage of this mono functional group ?
If you remember , in this case using mono - functional group , the insert cap with non - functional group and when you use the other strategy , the type one where you have one of the groups excess is still has virtually date polymers , but there you have functional , same functional group present in both the sides .
When you use first strategy , you have same functional group present in both the sides , so that they do not interrupt with each other , react with each other , but you still have functional groups .
So , in case there is in future , when you take this polymer for other reaction , if there are any impurities unlikely present which might react with this functional group , you might land up in a problem scenario whereas if you have a mono - functional or chain stopper , the insert cap with non - functional group .
So , it will not react .
That is only the advantage in this case , but in this advantage , you have two , have an extra molecule in the reaction .
We will move to the next topic of molecular weight distribution .
Now , you know that the product of a polymerization is a mixture of different chain links .
So , in any polymerization reaction , you at the end of the reaction , you have a distribution which content similar molecular .
Now , in the step molecular , how the distribution looks ?
We will try to get some information , some prediction from statistics .
See whether we can estimate , we can predict what would be the molecular with distribution , both numbers average and weight average , weight fraction and distribution of the molecules present .
Now , let us , we have to consider or we have to find what the number of fraction is or say probability of finding a chain with x mar x structure units .
If we can find the probability of all x or x mar , then we can surely get the distribution .
So , to generalize , let us try to find what the probability of finding a chain in the reaction medium with the x bar is .
Now , you consider a reaction of A plus BB type or say AB type and consider this is present in one is to one .
This following statistics was first done by Flory .
So , this distribution will guess is known as Flory distribution .
Now , how do you get this probability in x bar ?
X bar means x n is x x bar .
If a chain which has x number of structure units which means , this is a polymer of this x .
Now , how many molecules are there in x mar ?
In x mar , the number of groups , a structure , x structure , also number of groups will be x .
X is the number of structure units .
So , number of a group will be also x .
Now , out of this x number of a groups , one is at the end unreacted , and x minus 1 have reacted to form linkages .
See , if x mar at a , which one is the end which is free and x minus 1 is the number of a functional group as which is reacted .
Now , what is the probability of finding one free A group ?
If P is the conversion probability of one free A group is 1 minus P , means unreacted probability of one free A group .
Reacted is P and P is the conversion .
So , what is the property of two A group ?
Reactant P into P or P square .
3 A group reactant is P cube .
So , in x mar , we have x minus 1 A group which is reactant .
So , in x minus 1 x mar , a probability of x minus 1 A group reacted is P to the power x minus 1 .
So , in case of x mar which has one free one , free A group and x minus 1 A group which is reacted to probability of finding such x mar is given by 1 minus P .
The product of these two probability is x minus 1 .
Now , what does it mean ?
The probability of finding a chain which has x structural unit which is nothing but the mole fraction , mole on number fraction of x mar which is say , N x 1 by P P to the power x minus 1 .
This is your mole fraction .
So , again I write mole fraction of x mar is given by 1 minus P P to the power x minus 1 .
Now , what is this mole fraction ?
It is the number of molecules having in mar .
So , N x is the number of molecules having in x mar in x structural units by total number of molecules present in that time is 1 minus P , so P to the power x minus 1 .
Now , what is N ?
N is the total number of molecules present at time t , which is given by the total number of molecule minus PN 0 has earlier , so N 0 1 minus P , where N 0 the number of monomers in the beginning .
So , N x will be given by N 0 , 1 minus P square , P x minus 1 .
So , this is the number of molecules present which have x mar in x number of x mar , which means number of molecules or changes present at any time having x number of structural units .
How does it look ?
This distribution let us draw it again in next page .
This is of the order of p .
So , if this is the duration of P which means at lower , this is the lowest P , this is the intermediate P and this is the highest P which means that at the lowest P , your polymer mixture has maximum number of molecules having low x .
That means , low number of consol group , it has intermediate conversion .
In that case also , the maximum number of group present or maximum number of molecules present is the molecules having lower number of structural units in the chain .
If we increase the conversion further , then also the maximum of the number of chains having small number of functional groups , small number of structural units and maximum , but this difference comes down as we increase p .
So , what does it mean is that in any case of state polymerization , in any point of time whether you say small conversion or high conversion , what is the number of molecules which is present in maximum are the monomers because mono mass has the least number of structure units .
Look at the distribution , the maximum mean on the left hand side which is the minimum of x .
That means these are the monomers .
So , at any conversion region , whether it is a small low conversion , low conversion , medium conversion or high conversion , the reaction medium will have in number , fraction in number , not the width in number wise maximum number of monomer present .
Now , the number of monomers will decrease as the conversion goes up , but even at very high concentration , there are significant numbers of monomers present in the reaction .
So , if you take a monomer , a polymerization mixture , the end of the things maximum number will be present at the monomers , then dinomers , then trinomers and so on .
So , the real polymers would be in the smallest number present in the reaction medium in case of numbers , but the numbers are not always very significant .
Weights are more significant than numbers .
So , how we will look at , how the weight fraction is distributed ?
How the weight fraction of this individual chain varies with x , which is the number of monomer present ?
So , weight fraction of x mar is the weight of all molecules of x mar divided by total weight of the mixture , if N x is the number of molecules having x structural units .
So , N x is the number multiplied by x which is the number of structural unit present in one molecule .
X is the number of molecule number of structural unit present in one molecule and n x is the number of such molecules .
So , total in N x in x and in average is the molecular width of the structural units .
So , this is the molecular structural units , this is the number of structural unit present in one chain and this is the number of such ends and you can sum total with it and sum up all such x mar , so all of x .
So , we can get in x by x N x total .
This summation for all x s should give you N 0 total numbers of molecule and N x by N 0 .
We have seen earlier , we can put that value and we can get this expression .
So , that is your weight fraction .
So , weight fraction is given by this number , this expression whereas , number of fraction was given by this was N 0 here how a plot will look like if a plot here .
So , weight fraction of x mar , it will be something like this .
This is the plot , the weight fraction as you can see from this distribution .
Unlike in case of number of fraction , you have always the maximum number was the lowest x , the chains having lowest x and one more being the least x 1 x .
In this case , there is distribution with the maximum .
There is maximum and this maximum around comes above the x in bar number of average .
This x is where the maximum comes .
It is above the x in bar and this is again with increasing P .
So , this is the least P and this is your intermediate P and this is your highest P .
So , as I expected with increasing P , you have x also increases , molecular poly molecular also increases , but if you plot with fraction , you can see this is not the monomer features .
These are the timer dimer which is present in maximum number .
What is present in maximum , it corresponds to the polymer chain which is having average degrees of polymers .
So , the weight , if you take all the chains and plot the weight fraction in five maximum , where x is equals to or to the average degrees of polymerization .
When I increase number , if we talk about number fraction , it is the lower monomer , dimmer or trimmer .
They are presenting the maximum number , but its weight reach matters most , not the number in terms of polymer property is .
Their weight could be more because monomers , dimmers presents in not significantly contribute any polymer properties in the weight which will contribute more in terms of polymer properties .
See if you want to get the M M bar and number wise molecular weight and weight of molecular form , this distribution , you will get it .
We know the width number of fraction and weight fraction .
We also know the expression of M n and M w M n .
We know X n bar multiplied by average molecular of the structural units and X n bar is mole fraction multiplied by the number multiplied by the number which is given by X n 0 1 minus P square P to the power of x minus 1 sum over x , and if you do this math , you will land up 1 minus 1 minus P M w is X w bar m average X w bar is weight fraction multiplied .
There is number of fraction .
It is weight fraction .
So , u X is square 1 minus P square P X minus 1 and if you solve this , you will get , we get X bar is 1 plus P 1 minus P .
What is the process index which is given by M w bar by M n bar , same as X w bar X n bar is 1 plus P 1 minus P divided by 1 , 1 minus P which is given by 1 plus P .
So , PDI is 1 plus P .
For step polymerization , this is very important because it will end up in most cases , PDI is 2 .
Why is it ?
So , as we have seen , I understood in last lectures , previous lectures that to make a high enough molecular weight which is useful for application P as to be very close to 1 .
If P is close to 1 , PDI is almost in every case is close to 2 .
So , you cannot make a step polymerization of high molecular weight , where PDI is narrow .
1 , 1.2 , 1.3 that is not possible because do you remember what he have told that to make a high enough molecular width , you have to be having r is equal to 1 close to 1 .
So , as P is close to 1 , if your half P to a lower level than no matter what is your r , no matter what is r , whether r is 1 , still you get lower molecular widths .
So , if you have higher molecular width polymer , nobody can claim that he does not have narrow , very narrow distribution of 1.2 , 1.3 , 1.5 .
That is not possible .
Whenever you make high molecular width by step polymerization , you are going to get poly dispersity of closed to 2 .
So , without knowing both the molecular wise M n bar M n , if you know only of them and you have given the structures , one structure , if know that this is made by step polymerization , if you are given only one of them .
See if you have given M n has 10000 and a polymer is supplied to you , given you know the structure and from the structure you know that this is made by step polymers , then you even is 10000 .
This means you know also P which is close to 1 .
See in these cases say , 90 percentage or something and you also know PBI which is close to 2 .
So , you know M w bar is close to 20000 .
So , from the single data of M n and the structure , you know all others P is close to 1 .
In this case , exactly is 98 percent , but for all purpose , we can consider P is 1 and PDI is close to 2 and MD is close to 20000 .
So , this should be clear now .
We have seen in last page that PDI is 1 plus P which is always close to 2 , or if the molecular weight is lower , it would be less than 2 .
It can never be more than 2 because P cannot be more than 1 .
Anytime , at any point , P cannot be more than 1 .
So , P is very close to 2 , at most if your polymer molecular is low , it can be little lower than 2 .
It can never be more than 2 .
For in practice , most of the industrial polymers at the end of the polymers , if you measure the molecular weight distribution , you find , no it is found that PDI is slightly more than 2 , not much say , 2.2 , 2.5 , something like that .
So , theoretically , we have seen that it can never be 2 or more than 2 , but in practice , we find that after end of the polymerization reaction , if you do explanatory finally what is polymerization distribution , you find that it is slightly over 2 .
So , how this is possible ?
It can only be possible if there are side reactions which are producing smaller molecules in excess .
Now , if any distributions have more smaller molecules than expected M w and M n , both will come down and as you know that smaller molecules effect more than M n than M w .
So , drop the percentage , drop in M n because of presence of non - polymeric small molecules , the effect of M n will be more than M w So , M n will be dropping more compared to M w .
So , your PDI will go down .
That means , it will be more broader .
How can , what are the types of side reactions ?
We have one major side reaction is which is present in most of the polymerization step .
Polymerization side reaction is cyclization .
Now , you understood why we are bringing this concept of cyclization .
As you have seen that most , as I said that most of the case , PDI of polymer after the reaction found to be little lower to in practice .
That means , they are side product which are small molecular in nature which affect M M mode than M w , which means the N w by M n goes up .
So , PDI goes up little lower .
Now , how can cyclization product if you consider molecules , they are both functional in both the sides .
So , if they can react inter molecularly and make a cyclic product , so if you talk about amino acid , it can form a cyclic product plus H 2 O .
If you have hydroxy acid , then it can form a cyclic product like the monomer .
These are the intra molecular reactions in the monomers of AB type .
If you have monomers like AA type or BB type , then you have the intra molecular reaction cyclization in monomers .
It is not possible because both the sides , you have a di acid , di caboxly acid , both the side you have a two carboxyl acid or di - hydroxyl compound and both the side , two hydroxyl acid group .
So , monomers , they cannot cyclize intra molecularly , but cannot they cyclize at all .
They can in a because in a , they have two defined functional group at both the sides .
So , we are talking about reaction between di hydroxyl and di di - hydroxyl compound and Indus intermediare stages .
Then you have hydroxy acids or hydroxy amine and then they can intra molecularly react and cyclize .
Let us see some example , generic example .
See AA BB type structure , this can cyclize to give like this .
Even in case of AB type of monomer also , you can also have cyclization at an intermediate step .
So , these are showing the possibilities of cyclization .
If you have AB type monomers , then in monomeric stage also , it can intra molecularly cyclize .
If you have BA or BB type monomer , it can only cyclize at stage .
Now , what is the tendency of a monomer to cyclize , participate in cyclization reaction compared to a linear reaction ?
If you have intermediate molecule like this , it can take part in a intra molecular cyclization reaction or it can also as usual , what you just learnt all the time , it can take out linear reactions to make high molecular polymer .
Now , it is desirable fast , it is desirable that this take part in linear polymers and not in cyclization .
If its cyclic form cycles , then it will form low molecular .
It will come out from the reaction and those will contribute to the lower molecular fraction , and to increase your poly dispersity , you cannot avoid the cyclic formation .
They are always present in the cyclic formation .
That is the reason why your poly dispersity goes up little over because you cannot avoid completely .
Formation of cyclic in a step polymerization is always present in little amount , so that its contribution to your PDI to be little lower .
Now , what is the comparison ?
If you compare a cyclization process and the linear polymerization process , what are the tendencies ?
Now , if I compare between cyclization tendency verses linear polymerization tendency , now this depends upon both kinetic factor as well as thermodynamic factor .
Thermodynamic factor comes from the stability of the ring size .
Now , when they form cyclic , when this form cyclic , it is always forming a ring and the size of the ring determine whether it will form in thermodynamically , it will form the formation or not .
Now , you know for organic chemistry knowledge , what is the stability of differing , what is the strain ?
If I go from a ring size to 3 to 4 , strain comes down .
Then 5 and again strain comes down .
6 is the least .
If I go up again from 7 member ring , again it goes up 8 , the strain goes up and then again it starts up to 13 .
It goes up and for instance after 13 , it comes down in strain .
So , if you have ring stability order , then you have 3 member rings , 4 member ring .
So , if you talk about the compare ring size , then 6 , 14 and larger are the more stable rings .
Then the 5 and 5 ring size within 7 to 13 and the least stable is the 3 to 4 ring size .
This is applicable for methylene groups and also , this ether are the backbone , the cycling and ether other carboxylic groups , carbonic groups .
Now , what will be discussion in the next class is take this forward , this ring size and we know that what the thermilyn factor is .
The ring size determines the stability , and of course guide the tendency of your formation .
We will talk about kinetic factor in next class , in next lecture and then compare between what are the factors we should take care to reduce the cyclic formation as desire that this should have minimum amount of the cyclic in the polymer mixture , but as I said that we cannot have word cyclic formation .
So , that is the reason why you always get a a little lower to.. ... So , we will come back and start with and repeat this thermionic factor and a little bit , and then start the kinetic factor , and also talk about reaction conditions which defers the cyclic formation which is responsible for cyclic formation .
See you .
So far we have seen the influence of substrate concentration , inhibitor concentration or activator concentration on the rate of enzyme catalyzed reaction and they very strongly influence the catalytic behavior .
Besides the substrates , inhibitors or activators two major environmental parameters which form or which constitute a bulk environment for the enzyme catalyzed reactions are pH and temperature .
Today we will be looking at these environmental parameters and how they influence the whole enzyme catalyzed reactions .
As you know enzymes are primarily very complex molecules and we had also looked into the complexity of the situation as regards to their catalyses , as regards to their specificity .
The whole effect of pH and temperature therefore is not based on a single interaction like in the case of substrate or an inhibitor which is usually their effect on the reaction rate and the formation of dynamic complexes with the enzyme .
In the case of pH and temperature the effects are multidimensional .
If you look at the pH effects you will notice that the pH influences enzyme reaction rates or enzyme reaction in general in a number of ways .
The first and probably the most common feature could be the shift in equilibrium .
A number of enzyme catalyzed reactions that are reversible in nature primarily can be affected strongly by the pH , particularly the reaction like oxidoreductases .
If you take for example ethanol oxidization by alcohol dehydrogenase , forming acetaldehyde plus NADH plus H .
If you consider such a reaction you will notice that the concentration of hydrogen ions at any given pH can be regulated by the pH of the environment .
By taking a buffered reaction mixture at a higher pH the concentration of hydrogen ions in the reaction mixture can be maintained at a very low level and the reaction can be driven in the forward direction .
Similarly if you reduce the concentration or the pH of the buffer in which the reaction takes place you can also bring down the equilibrium constant of the reaction .
This shift in equilibrium although not directly related in any way must be considered in conjunction with the rate of the reaction .
If you consider this reaction although this reaction may have an optimum pH of , say for example , seven that means the rate of reaction is maximum at pH seven .
But at pH seven , the reaction may not be driven very largely to the forward direction .
The reaction may stop as soon as some concentration of the product and hydrogen ions are built up .
To be able to drive the reaction in the forward direction you need to adjust the pH so that the concentration of hydrogen ions can be reduced and therefore the reaction can be driven .
But the reaction might proceed at a very slow pace .
For example if you consider let us say pH nine .
Just alter the pH value .
At pH nine the concentration of hydrogen ions will be hundred fold less , one hundredth of at pH seven and therefore you can drive the reaction as far as the equilibrium constant is concerned but at a very slow rate .
The shift in the equilibrium must be considered in terms of the rate .
So pH optimum or the equilibrium constant they are two issues which are to be considered independently .
The second issue which is important in the case of pH effects is the stability of the protein confirmation .
As we all know that proteins retain their native confirmation within a limited pH range , because electrostatic interactions , which are a major force , non - covalent force are involved in the confirmation of the enzyme molecule .
So within a limited pH range at which the right kind of amino acid residues are ionized the native confirmation of the protein is maintained .
If you shift that pH very often gross alterations occur often called as denaturation .
That means if there is an irreversible change in the confirmation then the enzyme is considered to have been deactivated .
We assumed the stability behaviour of enzymes .
In earlier stabilization studies we saw that a two stage model is the most accepted model for enzyme which consists of two steps , native protein going into an unfolded form and then irreversible inactivation to in - active enzyme .
While the first step is reversible , the second step is irreversible and always the approach to stabilize and a similar effect is noted even for the pH .
Initially if the pH alteration is mild if you go beyond a certain level of pH change you might observe only reversible change and therefore the enzyme can be brought back to a native confirmation but if you further change the pH it might undergo to a irreversible inactivation and which may not be possible to bring back .
The third role is in which the hydrogen ions play a role for either inhibitor or an activator .
Wherever we are considering the involvement of ionisable substrates or the products that are formed which are ionisable , the hydrogen ions will play the role of an inhibitor or an activator .
The fourth role of pH and probably one of the most important role which pH plays and which directly influences the rate of reaction is the ionization of the amino acid residues on enzyme active sites .
On the enzyme active sites a number of amino acid residues are present which are charged and these charged residues will ionize as a function of pH of the bulk environment and therefore it is required that they are at a particular ionization state in which the enzyme offers the maximum reaction velocity .
The effect of pH is linked to the ionization state of the enzyme active site .
That means if there is a particular state of ionization of the active site of the amino acid involved , whatever fraction of the enzymes present in that fraction will constitute the catalytically functional enzyme .
Rest of the enzyme concentration will not be useful .
This ionization state will affect the maximum reaction velocity of the enzyme because ultimately you are affecting the total effective enzyme concentration which is in the true ionisable state of the system .
The last effect is due to ionization of substrate .
Although many of the substrates which are used in the enzyme reactions may be neutral , like ethanol or any other non - ionisable substrate , many of them also contain carboxylic group or hydroxyl group or amino group .
The substrate will also ionize and depending upon the true ionization state of the substrate which is accepted by the enzyme at the binding site , the fraction of the substrate which will get bound will determine the pH effects .
The ionization of substrate will influence the Km value of the enzyme .
The Km value will be altered because the apparent concentration of substrate which we are providing is not the true substrate concentration which is interacting with the enzyme and it may be lesser than that because the ionized state which is catalytically acceptable to enzyme is less than that .
Therefore the pH effects must be looked into all these parameters or all these effects in a comprehensive manner .
Practically it may be difficult to consider all these effects in one go because sometimes they may be counteracting and so the net effect of what we notice is a very complex phenomenon , all over .
To understand the behavior and to derive certain meaningful conclusions one may create or design experiments in which only one of the pH effect is considered prominent and in fact the pH effect studies have contributed a lot to understand the identification of the amino acid residues in the active site in conjunction with the chemical modification studies .
Common technique to study the amino acid residues or identify the amino acid residues at the enzyme active site is by chemical modification of the different function of the groups that are present .
In addition to that their effect on the ionization behavior and ultimately the rate effect and putting both the things together can give you a confirmatory result or conclusion on the identification of the amino acid residues on the reaction rate .
We will consider today mainly the ionization of amino acid residues on the active site which is primarily a major factor which influences the typical reaction profile that you are familiar with of the effect of pH on the enzyme .
You often end up getting a variety of profiles when we study pH .
When we study the enzyme reaction rate as the function of pH we get a variety of profiles .
For example in the first case in the diagram , in part a you notice that , the effect of pH is shown against the percentage rate of the maximum value .
Maximum value means the optimum pH , the optimum or the maximum at which it shows and with a single ionisable residue on the active site .
When there is only one ionisable residue with the pKa value of nine initially at a lower pH value the enzyme activity remains constant and when you go to higher pH value the rate falls and subsequently at an extreme value it comes down to zero .
We will determine the pKa values and their role .
In the second case you notice that it may be a much broad based pH profile .
A profile like this shows maximum value over a pH range , not a very broad range but at least in one or two units .
This reflects probably the presence of two ionisable amino acid residues , one acidic and one basic on the enzyme active site and the profile is like this .
Of the two amino acid residues one has pKa three and one has pKa ten , just a typical profile which you get .
Most commonly you may end up getting a profile of a very sharp maximum and we are familiar with the typical terminology called bell shaped curve .
You have very sharp pH optimum which is considered at the peak of this .
Such a situation is a special case of this broad profile in the sense that here the pKa value of the two ionisable groups are distinct apart , one at three and another at ten .
Their ionization doesn ’ t really influence each other so much .
One of the amino acid is ionizing and the other is not in a very highly ionised state and therefore you got a broad pH .
But in case the pKa value of the two ionisable groups are close enough that means at a particular pH , the ionization of one amino acid residue does also ionize , to different extent , the other amino acid residue .
In that case they will tend to look as if both the ionizations result are merged and you get a sharp profile because here the pKa values of the two amino acid residues are seven and eight which are pretty close .
So that is a kind of scenario you get .
It is a comparatively simplistic situation .
In practice in many of the enzymes for practical applications , you might end up with a profile like this which consists of not ionization of one or two amino acid residues but more than two , may be five , may be seven and may be six .
The net pH profile may be a sum total of all the effects and they can be broken down into linear segments and each linear segment will represent the ionization of one of the amino acid residues .
The effect of pH on the reaction velocity must be considered as a parameter on the rate of reaction .
Let us take the simplest case .
Assume like in the first case that the enzyme possesses only one ionisable amino acid residues .
The ionization of the residue can be considered as K EH E - + H + That is the neutral enzyme , which is a protonated enzyme can dissociate into the negatively charged enzyme and the protons with the ionization constant of K .
Under these circumstances , the concentration of EH will be EH = E - .H + / K and the total enzyme concentration E0 = EH + E - E0 = EH + K.EH / H + = EH ( 1 + K / H + ) E0 EH = = E0.H + / H + + K ( 1 + K / H + ) If we assume that EH is the catalytically active form and not the negatively charged enzyme , then the substrate will bind only to EH .
EH + S EHS EH + P If you assume that EH is the catalytically active form that is the enzyme is present in the form of EH , in that case the Vm , the maximum reaction velocity will be Vm = k.E0.H + / H + + k The enzyme is present in the form of EH and therefore you multiply k , the rate constant k here , with the concentration of EH .
If the total enzyme is present in the form of EH that is Vmtrue .
That is the maximum reaction velocity which one can achieve at some pH when predominantly all the enzyme E0 is present in the form of EH .
The concentration of E - is negligible .
That is a true Vm .
Vmtrue / ( 1 + k / H + ) You arrive at a relation where by you see the Vm is the affected by a factor 1 + k / H + In such a case if you plot the profile of pH , which is negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration , with log of Vm you end up with a profile like this .
If you take logarithm on both sides logVm = log Vmtrue – log ( 1 + k / H + ) If you consider the extreme conditions that is when hydrogen ion concentration is much , much greater than the ionization constant or in the other words the pH is smaller than pK , then log Vm = log Vmtrue .
That means it remains constant .
At a value of pH which is lesser than pK value of the ionisable residue , the Vm remains constant and at its original value .
Only when the hydrogen ion concentration becomes smaller than k or pH becomes greater than pk , log Vm = log Vmtrue – log k + log H + The hydrogen ion concentration will influence , Vm will be decreased and you get a downward fall .
If you extrapolate these two lines , at the point where pH and pK are identical you will get a point of intersection at which the two lines will merge .
Another option available to us is instead of EH , E - or the negatively charged enzyme is the active form .
If the E - is the active form , not the neutral enzyme in that case although … .
will be identical but the rate profile will be different .
The rate profile will be Vm = k E0 K / H + + K You can again analyze the same way and the profile obtained will be reverse of this and you get pK value .
Only difference is the direction of the pH effect will be changed and the analyses will remain on the identical lines .
That is a very simplistic situation only to appreciate and understand the effect of ionization of the amino acid residue on the reaction rate .
But if you take a little more realistic case that instead of having one amino acid residue , we have two amino acid residues or two ionisable residues there might be more than two other amino acid residues which are involved in the active site but they may be non - polar .
If there are two ionisable residues involved , one containing a carboxylic group and amino group and if you add acid or base or change the pH , the ionization state of the two residues will change .
Both groups being in the ionized form , if it is the active form then you can see the effect of addition of acid or base in this equilibrium .
If the middle thing is the ionisable form , then you can also predict that the left hand side form of the enzyme EH2 is more reduced form than the EH and then EH is more reduced than E .
If this EH is the form which is catalytically active , that means it binds to S the substrate and forms the product .
To analyze the system we have taken , we consider that there are three dissociation constants involved .
One is the ionization of the two amino acid residues .
If we represent Ka and Kb as the ionization constant of the two residues that are involved and the third we are taking as Km which is the dissociation constant of the enzyme substrate complex .
We define it as analogous to the dissociation constant , Km .
In such a case the typical profile that will be obtained of pH will be a bell shaped curve with the pH optimum at the middle of it which we consider as the typical profile and Vm .
If we look at the analyses of such a system you will notice that you can write the three different equilibrium and get the concentrations of individual enzyme species that are present in the three states .
Let us consider the first one , the case of EHS that is the interaction of the EH with the substrate and we can write the concentration of EHS EHS = EH.S / Km I am omitting the parenthesis to denote the concentration term .
These terms represent the concentration terms.Similarly if you look at EH2 EH2 = EH .
H + / Kb E = Ka.EH / H + This is based on the equilibrium dissociation of the three species .
Our total enzyme concentration E0 will be equal to E0 = E + EH + EH2 + EHS The total enzyme is present in four different species : the free enzyme , the partially reduced , fully reduced and the substrate bound which is involved in binding only with the EH .
Therefore we can substitute the value EH E0 = EH { 1 + Ka / H + + H / Kb + S / Km } From this if we put the expression in the term for EHS EHS = E0.S / Km { 1 + Ka / H + + H / Kb + S / Km } or reaction velocity will be v = k [ EHS ] That is the concentration of the enzyme substrate complex which has bound the doubly ionized enzyme complex .
V = k [ EHS ] = k.E0.S Km ( 1 + Ka / H + + H / Kb ) + S The whole effect of the change of pH that is the hydrogen ion concentration is influenced by this parameter in the parenthesis .
The parameter in the parenthesis influences or depicts the effect of pH on the reaction velocity and this parameter will pass through minima as hydrogen ion concentration is varied and you can get the minimum value by simply differentiating it with respect to hydrogen ion concentration .
If you denote this function as F dF / dH + = 1 / kb – ka / ( H + ) 2 = 0 If you equate it to zero you get 1 / kb = ka / ( H + ) 2 Hydrogen ion concentration gives you this function F to be a minimum .
When this function is minimum your reaction velocity will be maximum and that will be given by ( H + ) m = vka.kb You get the minimum value of this function .
This is not the minimum hydrogen ion concentration but is the value of this function F which is minimum .
The rate will pass through a maximum when the function is minimum and at this concentration of hydrogen ion the reaction velocity will pass through a maximum .
You can use this expression to denote to the effect of k , the effect of ionization constant of two amino acid residues on the reaction velocity of the enzyme catalyzed reaction .
You can increase on the complexity by taking more and more number of ionization .
It is not necessary that there will be always one negatively charged and one positively charged amino acid residue .
There might be more than one of each of the type .
There might be two negatively charged , there might be one positively charged or there might be two acidic and one basic or more than that in the case of particular enzyme .
The only difference you will notice in that case is that the pH optimum profile will not be a very sharp bell shape but can be broken down into different stages or segments , each of the segment representing the ionization state of that particular segment .
It will be important to notice that the sharpness of the profile of the pH versus reaction rate will also depend on the proximity at which the pK value of the different amino acid residues lie .
Very often just by a pH profile if the number of amino acid residues involved are not very large , one can guess the likely number of amino acid residues involved and knowing the pK value of different amino acids that are known , that are likely to be present one can make judgment whether a particular ionisable amino acid residues present or not .
That is the effect of pH as far as the ionization of enzyme active sites are involved .
The next stage which is again very important is to look at the ionization of substrates because it is not only important that the enzyme may ionize it may also be very commonly feasible that when you are handling the charged substrate molecules and very often the protein itself is a substrate which is a poly electrolyte and it will have many functional groups which will be ionisable .
In those cases the binding of the substrate to the enzyme will depend upon the ionization state of the substrate .
Depending on the number of charged functional groups on the substrate the situation might be more and more complex .
But just to consider two simple model cases let us consider a substrate which in its unionized form is not catalytically active but is able to bind to the enzyme for catalytic function .
The substrate itself is not catalytically active , it is only enzyme which is a catalytically active component and if suppose we assume a simplistic case wherein the substrate can ionize and give you a protonated form of substrate with the ionization constant of K .
S + E ES E + P K SH + You can arrive at the rate expression for such a system as Vm .
S V0 = Km ( 1 + H + / K ) + S You will notice that in such a case the net effect of the ionization of substrate is an increase in the Km value .
The Km value is modified to the true Km K ’ m = Km ( 1 + H + / K ) The expression is analogous to that of competitive inhibition .
That means in such a case the hydrogen ion acts as a competitive inhibitor for the substrate .
The neutral substrate and protonated substrate is the reactive form which is acceptable to the enzyme .
Part of the substrate which got protonated by binding with the hydrogen ions becomes a dead end complex as happened in the case of a competitive inhibitor and therefore you get a similar profile which gives you a Km value .
The Km apparent , if you consider K ’ m as Km apparent varies with the hydrogen ion concentration .
So the effect of pH on the Km value can be noted to look at the pattern of inhibition .
In the second case you assume that it is the protonated form which is catalytically acceptable to the enzyme function .
SH + + E ESH + E + PH + S In such a case although the analysis will remain the same only the form of the reaction velocity will change .
Again there will be a difference in the Km value you will again get an apparent Km .
But the magnitude of apparent Km will be slightly different and will be given by V0 = Vm.S / Km ( 1 + K / H + ) S If you analyze the two apparent Km terms , in this case this one and in this case Km .
( 1 + K / H + ) S .
You will notice that only at extreme values of hydrogen ion concentration there will be difference in the behavior of the enzyme .
Otherwise they will be almost similar kind of behavior .
In both the cases you will notice that the ionization of substrate influences the Km value of the enzyme that has increased and this increase is in magnitude dependent upon the fraction of the substrate which is present in the form of the substrate molecule which is acceptable to the enzyme and ionization substrate .
Similarly if there are more than one ionisable groups in the case of a substrate a similar analyses can be arrived at .
We should consider SH + because that is the form of substrate concentration which is the total substrate concentration for all practical purposes .
V0 = Vm.S / Km ( 1 + K / H + ) S We have seen so for that this pH effects are quite complex and all the parameter that are influenced by pH cannot be considered in one go .
They need to be considered in isolation one by one and depending upon the information we want to collect .
Sometime the information required is only to understand the optimum pH value of the reaction .
So life is very simple .
You conduct the enzyme catalyzed reaction in a buffered medium with different pH values and get the reaction rate and use the one which has the maximum value .
Sometimes you want to identify the amino acid residue at the active site .
You need to make analysis of the enzyme reaction at the pH enzyme rate profile , detailed analysis to get the pK values of the amino acid residues involved and thereby make deduction .
This needs to be confirmed again by chemical modification studies .
Therefore such an analysis can give you an indication but may not be able to give you confirmed data .
The second environmental parameter which is very important is temperature .
Like pH , temperature is also a multidimensional parameter which influences different aspects of the enzyme catalyzed reaction .
Probably the very first step at which the temperature influences is the interaction of enzyme substrate complex , an equilibrium process , you know is a reversible equilibrium process .
The key parameter which represents the ES interaction , in our case we have noted at least for typical Michaelis Menten kinetics , is the Km Michaelis Menten constant .
The temperature will influence the effect on K and the study of effect of temperature on the Km is a very interesting issue because it gives you lot of insight into the thermodynamic aspects of the enzyme substrate binding like the enthalpic and entropic parameters involved .
If you look at the classical Vant hoff equation for an equilibrium process , the equilibrium process here is km E + S ES with the dissociation constant of Km .
The free energy change will be equal to ?
G0 = RT ln Km Note that I have purposely removed the minus term from here as Km is not the equilibrium constant , is dissociation constant almost like inverse of that and which again also can be equated to ?
H - T ?
S . I think all of you should be familiar that conventionally in biochemical systems we are used to use these terms with prime and I am sure that you must have understood the meaning of prime for the thermodynamic parameters in biochemical system .
? G ’ = RT ln Km = ?
H ’ - T ?
S ’ That is only for the sake of convention but the laws of thermodynamics do apply and the Vant hoff equation is also applicable , the second law of thermodynamics is also applicable and therefore you can write ln Km = ?
H / RT – ?
S / R So a very simple situation arrives that if you determine the Km values for an enzyme catalyzed reaction experimentally at a number of temperatures and then make a plot between ln Km and 1 / T you end up in a straight line with a slope of ?
H / R .
So one can easily get the magnitude of ?
H , the enthalpy change during the enzyme substrate binding .
Also the sign of slope I have shown only the positive slope it could end up in a negative slope also .
The sign also indicates whether the enzyme substrate binding is exothermic or endothermic .
You can get a thermodynamic picture of the enzyme substrate binding and also you will notice that the interaction on the X - axis will give you ?
S / ?
H . If you put this equal to zero you get ?
H / ?
S as the interaction point and thereby you can calculate both ?
H and ?
S for a given enzyme catalyzed reaction by studying the effect of temperature on the Km value of a reaction .
The second effect of temperature in the case of a enzyme catalyzed reaction is the dependence of K2 that is the turn over number or the rate constant of the irreversible step of the conversion of ES into P and that classically follows a Arrhenius kind of a pattern that is K2 = A e - E * / RT We have seen this analysis even in our initial lectures on catalysis that means the catalytic pattern of the enzyme as the catalyst and one can again analyze in the same manner lnK2 = ln A – E * / RT Very familiar profile 1 / T versus ln K2 , you get a negative profile and this is a slope of E * / R and that gives you a magnitude of energy of activation for the given enzyme catalyzed reaction .
So the effect on K2 that is the turn over number is primarily almost like any other chemical reaction .
The third effect on the enzyme catalyzed reaction of the temperature is the deactivation of enzymes .
Just like in the case of pH effects on the deactivation of enzyme , temperature is also mediated by inactivation process .
That means as long as you are keeping the temperature range in the environment of the reaction within a close range the enzyme may be functional but if the temperature ranges are shifted drastically to the higher side the deactivation occurs and a very broad picture of deactivation has been discussed earlier which is represented by a first order deactivation kinetics where you can define as E = E0 e - Kd.t Here also you can make a first order kinetics analysis that is your ln E / E0 versus time will give you a profile with a negative slope and slope will be equal to - Kd and this will be a function of temperature .
The magnitude of the deactivation constant will be a function of temperature .
One must look at the deactivation effect , the third effect and the second effect that is on the K2 as opposite forces .
While with the increasing temperature on the one side the reaction rate increases , the deactivation constant also increases .
The practical operational temperatures of enzyme reactions therefore are chosen on the basis of not just the optimum temperature that means the optimum temperature for the enzyme reaction rate but also taking into account the deactivation kinetics because the interest will be on the total productivity of the enzyme per unit enzyme rather than only initial reaction rates .
All these studies are based on initial reaction rate but if you look at the practical application that will be based on total productivity and both the effects the deactivation as well as increase of reaction rate with temperature should be considered .
So to summarize we have seen the effect of two major environmental parameters which are experienced by the enzyme catalyzed reaction the first is pH .
The effect is quite complex and the effect can be considered on the basis of the shift in the equilibrium or on the ionization of either substrate molecule or on the enzyme active sites .
The other parameter which is temperature also influences in a multiple fashion .
It influences to increase the reaction rate in a pattern of the Arrhenius plot .
It also influences the deactivation of the enzyme molecule and finally a very important tool which it provides is to understand the thermodynamic status of the enzyme substrate interaction and one can by computing the value of Km at different temperatures one can get a picture of the ?
H and ?
S for the given enzyme catalyzed reaction .
Welcome back to this course in Polymer Chemistry .
And in today ’ s lecture , we are going to start our discussion on polymer properties and how they are evaluated , this properties are evaluated .
And today we will start how discussion in mechanical properties , which may be continued in next lecture as well and then , eventually we will discuss very briefly the other properties .
Now , this lecture and probably , next one or two lectures is not directly related to chemistry for say but , as a polymer chemist , if we if you are hired in a company then , you must know the polymer properties .
Because , this is when you doing some polymer synthesis and characterizing them , finally you are targeting for some application and applications are linked with polymer properties .
So , unless you do not know , what the power polymer properties means , how their evaluated and how they are related structure how they are related to the polymers structures then , it is difficult for you to design a new polymer and then , synthesis it .
So , it is very very need a basic need to understand the polymer properties at least in brief .
And out of the polymer properties , I will spend more time on basically , we will discuss in detail about mechanical properties because , as you will see in next one or two lectures , this is the most important properties of the polymers .
And some other properties like thermal properties , environmental properties , they are linked to the mechanical properties .
Linked means , what I mean that basically , the polymers are exposed or be in contact with heat or some environment conditions and then , the properties mechanical properties of polymers are followed according after exposure .
So , mechanical properties is the most property for polymer and I will discussed the mechanical properties in the detailed .
And I will very briefly covered the other properties like thermal , environmental , barriers , surface , electrical , optical , fire resistances , etc .
And before I start discussion on polymer properties , I want to very briefly talk about polymer processing .
Mainly because , the fact that , till now we have understand or we have gain the knowledge of polymer resins , you know how to synthesis them , how to characterize them .
And then finally , these polymers will be applied in product , in applications and the step which converts the polymer resins into product is called processing .
So , polymer properties are tested on the final product or final specimens so , unless we know the polymer processing step , their it there will be gap between resins and a product or applications .
So , this is again not directly related to chemistry but , you must know the basic nomenclatures and basic techniques , how which how by which the polymer is converted from a resin to a product for final applications .
So , let us start our discussion on polymer processing very briefly as I said , polymer processing can be done from a melt state or a solution state .
Melt state , there are two three techniques mainly , extrusion , molding , thermoforming , by which the polymer converted to final specimen .
And for solutions , we can do casting is applied to making films and spinning is applied to both from polymer melts or polymer solutions for example , making fibers .
Now , as I as I said that , melt from the polymer processing from melt state are mainly three types , we can mainly two types , we can say extrusion and molding .
Extrusion is basically a step where , a compounding is mixing is done between the polymer resin and other other additives or reinforcement colorant and all these things .
And then , taken to the molding state to give the final part or extrusion techniques can be used for making final parts like , very simple parts like film , profiles like pipes , rods and so on .
Moldings are are these , these are techniques of molding injection molding , blow molding , these are applied for thermoplastics and compression molding transfer molding design applied for thermo sets .
So , what I will do , I will discuss this techniques important techniques like compounding , injection molding , blow molding , compression molding in very briefly .
So that , you know you have some idea about how this extrusion molding is done .
So , how the as the overview of the main processing technique , there is a formulation where , this poly solid polymer is added .
And if you need additives , invariably we need really , that the 100 percent polymer is used for any formulation .
There will be invariably some additives added and they can be mixed well and if there are color master batch or some other master batch , they can be added here .
So , this is the formulation and then , they are taken to melt processing steps like extrusion , it could be two step extrusion followed by molding or it can be just extrusion step .
And then , you finally get a the specimen where , some post processing steps are done like for example , if you are making a DVD then , the polymers are taken and then , extruded and finally , injection molded to a DVD form .
And then , the company takes it and put the data in it and put the decoration and finally , sell it as a product .
In this stage , you can add other agents like foaming agents , which makes the final product foam product or you can add the other fillers and reinforcement material .
Typically , amorphous materials are processed melt process at T g plus sum or 80 to 140 degree centigrade temperature .
Higher and semi crystalline materials as processed at melting temperature placid , temperature 20 to 50 degree centigrade .
Talk about briefly extrusion process , extrusion process as said , this is steady step process , this is continuous process having high productivity and it is used for making low complexity of parts like pipes sheets and so on .
This is a schematic or structure or a scheme of a extruder where extrusion is made , a one screw is shown , this is a single screw extruder .
That in some other cases , there could be two screw , which makes that instrument as twin screw extruder .
It has different zones having different temperature within increasingly , if you go from left hand side to a right hand side , the temperature generally increases and becomes steady somewhere in this region .
And there is a dye , by which the molten polymers are extruded out and cooled with the real cooled or cooled in a in water medium , it could be cooled in a both the ways .
So , basically in the first part , all the ingredients are added and those ingredient are mixed here , molten in this part , melted in this part and mixed thoroughly and as the screw rotates , the melt is pushed forward .
And finally , the melting is comp and melting and mixing is completed here and this this polymer melt is comes out from this dye .
And if you have different shape dye like sheets , you can form sheets or pipes here itself or if you want to use this material for for further injection molding or some other molding , still you can cut into granules in small pieces and make them as a granules .
Some other large companies , large polymer manufacturing companies , they just mix all this ingredients and extrude the polymer and make granules and sell those granules in big bags .
And those are purchased by the final or original equipment manufacturer , they just take those granules and do the molding at there there into make the final product .
So , the function of extruder is to pump the high viscosity melt , also mixing the ingredient .
Sometimes , if you add some , if deliberately wants some reactions to happen at higher temperature then , you can do in extruder .
Sometimes , they are unwillingly or unwantedly some reaction also take place inside extruder .
And if there are volatile materials then , you can add some vacuum somewhere here to remove those volatiles materials .
So , going to molding and molding is a cyclic transient process and is molding can be used for making complicated three dimensional parts , as I said it could be injection molding , blow molding , thermo forming .
Injection molding is done mainly for thermo plastic material and it is similar to the extruder machine , there is a hopper where , you add the gremial polymer material and some additives , which act as a mold release agent .
So that , after the part is formed , it can easily taken out from the mold , there is screws , it basically melts and mix those those polymers with additives here and this screw by rotating it , takes it forward .
There is a cylinder somewhere here , which basically pushes the polymer melt mix polymer melt in the mold and when molding is done , it is cooled and the part is ejected from this material this mold .
Other techniques like extrusion blow molding where , the extruded polymer is placed in form a tubular profile is like this , this is a tubular profile and it is placed inside the mold .
And then , the inherent gas is injected through to inflate this tubular profile , till it get the shape of the mold .
And finally , it is cooled here and the part is taken out , it is used mainly for bottles , hallow materials like bottles and similar materials .
Similarly , in in adjacent to extrusion blow molding , injection blow molding also can be used where , this parison , this tubular profile is basically injected in this mold .
And the rest of the steps are similar where , it the molds inflated with the inner gas and then , cooled and the part is taken out .
So , injection blow molding and extrusion blow molding is similar , except the the way this parish ion is inserted in the mold so , this scheme is shown here .
The other techniques in very briefly thermo forming where , sheets is first extruded and then , it is heated to a temperature just below the , just heated to the softening temperature then , vacuum is applied .
So that , this sheet is formed thermo can be thermo formed in the shape of the mold similarly , in injection molding machine , this is the place where the polymer melt is accumulated .
Now , in this case , if you can if you want to make a foamed polymer , you can add some inner gases here .
And then , make a short short which means , you can inject less material , which was supposed to be filling the entire mold .
So , if then what happens , this this material fill the mold with this gas in a foam a foam in between .
So , the surface would be in contact with the mold , it will be plain which would not have any bubbles , it will be smooth but , the bulk will have lots of inner gases as a foam so , it will so , you get a foamy material .
So , thermoset polymers are molded using compression molding basically , as you know that , thermo thermoset polymers cannot be flown at higher temperature , they are material .
So , they do not flow .
So , basically what you do is , you basically melt in a cavity and then , with particular shape mold , you just compress them and leave it .
You close this , compress them and close it and once it cools , you can take out this mold and you can form this shaped article or part so , this is in brief about compression molding .
So now , you have seen , how this polymers are converted to the articles now , we will discuss about the properties of this final polymer and this properties are very essential for the applications .
So , you have to make a proper polymer article or part having particular properties so that , you can sustain or you can apply to the application you are looking for .
And as I said that , I will be mainly I will be discussing the mechanical properties in in details , basic some basic terms in , when you talk about mechanical properties , stress you know that , it is force divided by the area upon which the force acts .
So , it is a stress is given by force so , stress is forced by area .
And strain is basically is the change in dimension change in dimension divided by the original dimension .
So , if you talk about length then , it will be change in length by total length typically , we express strain in terms of percentage .
So , strain percentage is given by d L by L into 100 so , that is the strain percentage .
We will be using this stress and strain very very frequently in coming coming discussion .
Now , mechanical probabilities is polymers , mechanical prosperities is related to deformation , what happened in when you apply some force or a stress to polymeric material or plastic material , it it deforms .
And the deformation is basically a but , what we discussed , what we talked about mechanical properties .
So , you first know , how many different types of deformation that a polymer undergo , under applied stress or applied force .
So , there could be three types mainly , one is elastic deformation you probably know that , we say that , elastic deformation happen when a material returns to its original state , releasing the stresses on releasing the stresses , following the same stress strain curve that it to deformation .
So , while if you apply stress it will deform , if you release the stress it should come back in the same path , stressed and come original state then , we called this is a linear this is elastic deformation .
It could be linear , if the stress strain behavior is linear , it goes from here and come back in the same path .
It is linear behavior and if it is something like that , it goes in this way and come back then , it is a nonlinear , nonlinear elastic behavior .
Second is your inelastic deformation where , basically inelastic behavior what happened , if you give the stress , give the force , the energy stored in the material .
So , when you release stress , that energy is given back so , you gave you get back to original state .
Whereas , in case of inelastic deformation , when we apply the energy or apply some force , the energy is lost .
So , it may deform permanently or even if come back to the original state , it it do not follow the same path .
So , in inelastic deformation , loss of energy happens and if at all it returns to the original state then , it does in a different route .
It could be two different type , visco elastic which may and may not shows permanent deformation and there is another type of deformation deformation where , the plastic deformation where , permanent deformation happen .
So , plastic deformation is said to have occurred when the deform material is permanently unable to return to it is initial state and yield point is that where , the materials start showing the plastic deformation .
What happen to in at the molecular level , in inelastic during elastic registration , the the resistance to deform the resistance to deformation can happen both intermolecular .
The polymer chains are you know entangle to each other so , polymers , the resistance to deform may happen , because of presence of the other polymer chain segment in the near viscidity .
Or it could be due to resistance , due to intra molecular because , the polymer chains are entangle so , different parts of the chain are linked .
So , they they they resist times they resist to give a resistance to deformation , elasticity elastomer you know elastomers are very very elastic .
So , it elongates quite high and entropy change on the deformation is the dominant factor in to the resistance of deformation .
In case of elastomer , the polymers are you know having conformation , quailed type conformation in in normal case .
So , if you write just polymer chain conformation like this and in and in real polymer , these are basically different chains are entangled with each other .
So , if you want to stretch , deform it like in elastomer what happen , this conformation entropy is a lost .
So , when you release that stress to gain that conformation entropy , it comes back to it is original state .
So , that is what this entropy change and deformation is the dominant contribution in the to the resistance of the deformation in case of elastic material .
And in case of plastic deformation in the polymers especially , in case in case of amorphous polymers , cooperative motion at of a large number of chain segments happen together , large say number of chain segments corporally move with each other .
And in case of semi crystalline polymer , deformation at crystallographic scale crystal state so , polymer chains might sleep with respect in the direction of the applied stress or it could move in the perpendicular director direction .
And there the could be deformation in case of semi crystalline polymer could be deformation in in the amorphous region or in case of spur light region .
So , we will we we talking about elastic deformation and plastic deformation , elastic deformation where on a plain releasing the stress , the sample comes up back to the original state and in case of plastic deformation , it it come it come does not come back .
The polymer sample on releasing the applied stress , it does not come back to the original state , there is a permanent deformation .
So , you test the mechanical properties , the different types of test can be conducted , static states test like a tensile compressive shear properties , which gives stress and curves , stiffness and strength and toughness of polymeric material .
We impact test , which is basically high strength test done it very fast fast by by applying stress in a fast rate and it can give the impact strength , the resistance of about plastic material to a impact can be given by impact stress and time dependence of polymer material can be done from a creep test .
Similarly , the other test like dynamic mechanical test , fatigue test , hardness , abrasion resistance and these are all , within what this test mean are written here .
You can just read fatigue test is for determining the lifetime or durability , hardness is the resistance to surface indentation , abrasion resistance is the weightless by a fine or abrader or the finely divided abrasive particle .
But , for these lecture , we will mainly talk about first two test , which are used very often and rest of the test will not be covered because the , because of lack of time , this will not be covered in this lecture .
We talking about deformation of polymer material , that this deformation can be bring about in a polymer material in different ways .
Like tensile , you can pull a polymer specimen , you can compress them , which gives us a compressive deformation .
You can shear then and you can shear in rotational way as well , you can bend them , bend a polymer by applying stress in in the middle of the polymer where , the two sides are supported .
You can apply this stress or or so that , there is this deformation happen oscillatory , that stress can be applied or the deformation can happen in a tensile way or a shear shear manner .
So , that is that is the way , oscillation oscillatory deformation is done so , basically it you must know this basic deformation modes to understand the subsequent test and polymer mechanical properties .
So , let us talk about tensile testing , what is done , you take a specimen something like this geometry , which is like a tumbleset geometry or we call dog bone geometry in a crude way .
And then , fix this two side and pull them applied force from both the sides , sample is deform , the deformation is done in the constant rate and the amount of stress is required for keeping that constant rate of deformation is monitored .
So , stress is plotted against time or stress now remember , in this test and all subsequent polymer property testing , you must… Because , this test is very much dependent on the size , shape of the specimen and the environment , what you when you are doing the test like temperature and relative humidity of the environment .
So , you must there are agencies which give like ASTM and ISO International Standard Organization or ASTM American in Standard Organization where basically , they give specific conditions , specific size of the and shape of the polymer specimen and the conditions .
So , we must when we testing , we must keep those condition intact to get the report is full or repeatable polymer property measurements .
So , this is done with a fix shape , this tensile test is done with a fix shape , size and environment to condition and elongation at at a chosen or specified rate d L by dt .
So , what is the typical stress strain curve look like , we can analyze a stress strain curve so , stress is plotted against strain and these curves basically shows , what are the possible effect or possible deformation in a sample .
This is this does not happen for all the sample but , this is shown here to so that , you know all the different terms and related to this tensile testing .
So , as you know , the first part is linear up to this point so , this part is elastic and you from this slope , you can get the elastic modulus of the material .
This is the proportional to the limit and this is the point where , yield happened yield means , sneaking happens in the sample .
So , beyond this stress , beyond this strain , the polymer start deforming permanently so , up to this , is an elastic linear elastic limit and up to from here to here , it is nonlinear elastic limit .
So , you can if you deform up to this point and then , remove the stress , it will come back to the original state .
But , beyond this yielding point , it will not come back to the original state so , permanent deformation happens so , this is a plastic .
So , from this point to the further onwards , is a plastic deformation happening , below this elastic deformation is happening , this is called yield point .
So , the corresponding stress is the yield stress and corresponding strain is the yield strain and on subsequent applying subsequent stress , subsequent straining , sometimes at the end , the stress might go a further thus because , strain hardening technique takes place , the chains are already stretched .
So , for further stretching of the chains become difficult , polymer chains becomes difficult so , if you have more stress to give a given strain and this has strain hardening this is because , strain called strain hardening and this slopes sometimes can get give us the strain hardening modulus .
And this is the point where , polymer breaks , polymer fails , the basically failed apart and this is the corresponding stress is called the ultimate stress and the strain is the ultimate strain , which is the strain or elongation at at break .
So , please do remember all this terminologies , this yield point , this is final break point so , elongation at the break , ultimate strain and this slope , the initial slope gives us the elastic modulus .
Some terms related to tensile testing , stiffness usually stiffness related to the product of the modulus and the movement of inertia .
So , basically , if you have a specimen , you try to bend them and if you resist , you feel resistance to bending you call this , the material is stiff .
So , that is depends upon the movement of inertia , which is given by the shape and geometry of the specimen .
And if you compare between difference material and out of same sample specimen then , higher the modulus obviously , higher will be the stiffness , higher will be the resistance to bend .
So , this modulus is the material property whereas , the movement of inertia captures the contributed of structure design and the shape on the stiffness .
So , if you compare same structural design and the shape materials , the higher the elastic modulus or with the stiffness , rigidity is the ability to carry stress without changing dimension , basically .
Similar to stiffness , and the magnitude of the elastic modulus is a measure of rigidity , elasticity is the ability to undergo reversible deformation .
Means , where that , after the stress is released , it should come back to the original state that is , what mean by the reversible deformation .
And or carry a stress without suffering permanent deformation and it is indicated by the elastic limit or the yield point , beyond yield point the elasticity the sample actually undergoes permanent deformation .
Strength , is the load , is the sustain it is the ability to sustain dead load so , basically ultimate strain is the stress it it can capture or it can hold before it breaks and yield stress , yield strength is basically the stress , you it can it can take up before it yields .
And toughness is basically , the energy spent , the entire energy is spent for causing the material fail , is basically the the area under those stressed in curve in case of a tensile testing .
I just showed one example in in last page of one type of stressed in curve is basically capture everything , all the possible deformation of terminologies .
But , in typically , one particular polymer can have one type of this deformation behavior for example , polymer gels have this type of soft and weak stressed in behavior , this is hard and brittle .
So , it breaks at a low strain elongation value similar , this is hard and strong , this is strong and tough and this is hard and tough and example of these are given in this table .
So , hard means higher elastic modulus where , soft means low elastic modulus and weak can brittle is basically given by the elongational breaks .
So , higher high elongation means toughness value is high so , these are different types of stress tensile possible for different polymers , the examples are given here .
Some more examples with the names of the polymers this nylon , PVC , HDPE , LDPE now , just to compare the values of the polymers with metals .
For example , with highly elastic polymers like rubbers , they have low modulus 7 mainly about 7 MPa , stiff polymers which have higher modulus about 4 GPa and metals is is much higher , if you compare a polymer and metal , metal is much more higher modulus .
So , where in the applications , where you require very high loading high loading applications where basically , the part has to hold a very high load .
Basically , polymer does not does not fair well in those applications so , metal is the choice of material in those applications .
Tensile strains for bulk bulk polymers are less than about 100 MPa whereas , metals and ions , they are quiet high .
Elongation is where , polymers win over metals , the polymers can elongate in case of a elongation typically , polymers elongate much more than the metals .
Now , the stress strain curve we a talked about and the modulus or the stiffness and the rigidity and your elongation at break , all those parameters or properties can actually depend both on the temperature and the time .
The strain rate physically , how fast you applying the stress or how fast you straining the polymeric material for example , this is a stress strain curve for poly methyl methacrylate .
And as you can see the stress strain behavior changes at a lower temperature , it becomes hard and brittle .
Whereas , at higher temperature , it become soft and a and a along with a ductile , which means it the the sample can be elongated , is more tough in that that sense .
Similarly , if you change the strain rate , strain rates means the the the d L by a L value , the fast you are the fast you are changing this applying strain , see your the first deformation will change the stress strain behavior .
If the that the strain rate is higher , it will become closer to is become to hard and brittle and if you do the deformations , it is slow phase then , it will become more soft and ductile or tough in nature .
So , basically you must know that , the mechanical properties of polymers this for examples stress strain curve and other mechanical properties always as well , very much depended on the temperature of the experiments .
So , and and finally , where this material is applied so , definitely if you measure a modules or stiffness at say 40 degree centigrade and find your material is sustaining the load .
You probably may not used that at higher temperature like 80 degree you might see failure , because of decrease in the modules of the material .
So that , you must know that , all the mechanical properties depends on depend on the temperature of the experiment or the application and and the how fast the deformation is taking place , how how fast the load is applied .
So , just again showing the same thing , with increasing temperature , the sample become stuff and ductile .
With reducing temperature , becomes brittle and rigid whereas , applying high strain rate , makes the sample brittle and rigid , very slow strain rate mix the sample tough and ductile .
The modulus which means , the stiffness or rigidity , very much depends on the temperature , as I said so , this is the example , how the modules changes with temperature .
As we know that , the polymers have undergo glass transition and melting transition at at a adiabatic temperature for example , if you pure amorphous material undergo go glass transition T g whereas , semi crystallized polymers undergo both glass transition and a melting at T g and T m subsequently .
So , the so , the modulus also changes with temperature generally , molecular modulus decreases with increasing temperature of the thermoplastics and at T g and T m , the modulus decreases suddenly at T x added T g and T m .
And with increasing crystalinity , in case of semi semi crystallized polymers , with increasing crystalinity modulus goes up and also for the cross link polymer with increasing degree of the cross linking , the modulus goes up .
So , with different so , this is a plot of lock elastic modulus with temperature , which shows that , different regions of polymer elasticity .
Whereas , below T g , it is glassy , which have higher elastic modulus and more it is more of a elastic behavior is like a elastic behavior then , immediately after the T g it is becomes soft but , because of high viscosity thus , the polymer chains steel cannot move fast each other very easily .
And that is robbery here , leathery state and on further reading , it reaches the viscosity comes down and polymer chains can move fast each other quite easily and that state is robbery .
And this we talking about a amorphous material and at the highly temperature is , it behaves like a polymer liquid .
So , is basically flow state , this example of real polymers , nylon 6 is semi crystalline polymer , is basically drops after T g , it drops very fast and then , after T m this is T m and after T m , it is becomes polymer that , if the elastic modules becomes very low after T m .
So , this is T g here , drop in modulus and T m , drastic drastic drop in modulus in case of a semi crystalline polymer .
This is a pure amorphous polymers so , the drop in elastic modulus or modulus after T g and this is a rubber with cross linking .
So , it drops after T g but , because of the cross linking , if the presence of the cross linking , the elastic modulus or modulus does not drop significantly after after a value .
So , this is what I was discussing in in just a minute that , with a for a semi crystalline polymer with increasing crystalinity at the modules goes up elastic modules goes up .
Where , in case of cross linking , material with cross linking , the the material the less modulus can goes up further with cross linking .
So , this is the way , you can basically change , if your semi crystalline material , you can increase the crystalinity to increase the load bearing capacity of the material .
And you can also crosslink to increase the load bearing capacity , even at the higher temperature but then , cross link brings other problem like a possibility with it .
This is another mechanical property testing , we just discuss all last few minutes about tensile basically , the stresses is applied in a longitudinal direction .
Here , in case of flexible or bending testing is basically bending mode where , the stress applied .
It could be three point bending test or four point bending test , is like stresses or strain is applied in bending direction so , higher the modulus as bending will be lower .
We can we just talk about impact testing , impact basically is a dynamic loading at short duration .
You know we we know about impact like , if you have just a glass then , if you hammer it , it breaks which means , the glass has a very low impact property .
Glass like we talk about glass then , if you keep a glass and you can put a load on it , it does not break .
So , the modulus of glass is high because , the strain rate or the the stresses are applied is not in a higher rate you know , very fast rate .
But , when you impact , apply a hammer on that , you are applying the stress in a much faster rate so , a strain in the material at the very faster rate and the material performs poorly , the glass perform poorly .
So , the impact behavior of glass is basically poor so , the glass impact behavior and modulus does not always match with each other .
The testing itself is different modulus , we talk about the slow deformation that , we do deformation as we apply strain in a much slower rate compared to a impact testing .
So , impact testing is a dynamical load of short duration and very high strain and at high very high strain rate .
And the performance of thermoplastic or plastic material depends upon the stress rate obviously , the higher you know it depends up on how we are applying the stress , loading rate , what is the amount of force , temperature and sample geometry and nature of the sample of course .
There are different types of impact test available , which you know the you have to if you are applying a designing any you have made a polymer and you want to test , you have molded it and you want to test impact properties then , you need to know the target application .
Depending upon the target application , you choose the type of impact test should be done on that sample .
So , different types of test possible namely , Charpy , Notched Izod , Falling dart , tensile and and drop test and they are basically different and different types of test .
Charpy test is is shown here schematically , you have sample , the sample is clamped both the sides and there is a notched in the other side and you hammer it and find out the energy require to break the material .
In case of Notched Izod test , you clamp this specimen upto the notch , this both side and hammer on the top part .
So , this material , this specimen breaks from the notch and the amount of energy require will to break this material will be the Notched Izod impact energy .
Sometimes , the test is done without the notch where , we say just Izod testing or notched izod impact testing .
In case of tensile testing , the tensile bar , a dog bone type specimen or a dumbbell type specimen is fixed one side and another side with a pendulum is is hit the hammered from both the side .
So , actually the deformation or the strain happen in a tensile way , in a longitudinal way , uniaxial if this uniaxial to.. ... So , the only difference between this and a tensile stress strain test that , here the strain is applied or the stress is applied much higher rate .
So , the amount of energy required to break this bar is called impact strain .
Another testing where , a load is just applied of actually , allowed to drop from a height on a circular disk and it can break this material or it can make a hole , just hole depending upon the energy .
And the amount of energy required to break this material is again is impact energy for this plate .
And drop test is basically , take the specimen and drop from a certain height , which is very complex complex phenomena .
Now , we know different test impact test , tensile test , now we need to find out , what is the relations between the polymer structure and and the properties .
Now , as I said that , temperature is a very important thing so , we can compare for a same same polymer , same chemical nature at a same temperature , elastic modulus will increase with crystallinity .
As we have seen earlier that , for a particular semi crystalline polymer at a , if we want to increase the elastic modulus at a particular temperature , you increase the crystallinity .
Or we can if it is not a homo polymer , it is a blend of different phase , there is a basically there could be two , one a soft or rubbery phase and a hard or elastic phase .
Basically , with increase the soft disperse phase , the modulus increases .
If there is a orientation , the chains if the chains are already oriented little bit obviously , if you want to deform further , you have to you have to stretch the polymer chains further .
Which means , what I am telling that , this is the original state now , if I already have stretched and aligned oriented little bit then obviously , aligning from or stretching reforming from this state will be much easier compared to aligning from or deforming longitudinally form this state .
So , orientation increases modulus and for a semi crystalline polymer , if we increase a some glassy additives like glass fibers in the amorphous region then , basically the elastic modulus goes up .
Flexible modulus increase with elastic modulus generally , generally flexible modulus and elastic modulus go hand in hand .
So , with increase in elastic modulus of a plastic material , flexible modulus or bending modulus also go up .
Yield strength that is , the stress where , yielding starts or permanent deformation starts and again with yield strength decrease , if we add some plasticizer or a solvent molecule obviously , the yielding yield stress comes down .
It increases elastic modulus , it increases with crystallinity of a semi crystalline polymer and if we add this glassy additives like glass fiber then , yield state increases .
Elongational break decreases with increasing molecular weight and elongational break decreases with increases short change branching density of the polymer .
And basically , we relate brittleness of a polymer with elongational break basically , when something elongate more we say , this less brittle and if does not elongate , we call that it is a brittle material .
In general , if we talk about different polymers , if you want to compare the mechanical properties of different polymer in general what happen .
If you have steep polymer back bone obviously , stretching it further or deforming it further is always difficult .
So , yield strength and the elastic modulus is becomes higher , if it is a flexible back bone obviously , reforming deformation is much easier so , modulus comes modulus come down .
Similarly , if it is stiff then , you cannot deform it you know , you cannot strain it much longer which means , the elongational break for a stiff polymer is low .
Whereas , a flexible polymer will have very you know much higher elongational break , in terms of impact properties again , a stiff polymeric back bone , if you apply impact apply impact then , with a short time , the polymer cannot rearrange and absorb that energy .
So , it breaks .
it is become brittle whereas , if you have flexible polymer chain obviously , it can absorb that energy and change it conformation .
So , in general , if you want to summarize , flexible back bone , lower modulus and strength , chain stiffness would have back bone or bulky side group increases the modulus and strength , and chain stiffness lower the impact strength and elongation would break .
Now , with this , I stop for this lecture , I will just continue the mechanical property in the next lecture with little more discussion .
And we will talk about some other , we will start discussion about some other properties in next lecture as well .
Having understood the chemical and functional nature of enzymes , we will now move on to the kinetics of enzyme catalyzed reactions .
The enzyme kinetics deals with a quantitative analysis of the effect of various parameters on the rate of enzyme catalyzed reactions .
It involves molecular dynamics between the various species involved in the reaction .
One of the principle species as you know is enzyme itself and the interaction of enzyme with all other chemical species that is the substrate , the product , if there is any inhibitor all those molecular species , dynamics of these inter relationship or interactions is involved in the study of enzyme kinetics .
One of the essential features for study of enzyme kinetics is the experimental data .
To start with any kinetic analysis one needs to initiate with some basic experimental observations and to take some experimental observations the key parameters that are usually involved in the study are the enzyme concentration , substrate concentration , product concentration , concentration of inhibitor or activator if there is one where as enzyme , substrate and product are the universal chemical species involved in the case of an enzyme catalyzed reactions .
Then you have a set of environmental parameters like hydrogen ion concentration reflected in pH , or the temperature of reaction .
Then in most of the enzyme catalyzed reactions , we assume the water concentration to be very large almost in excess and for most of the analytical purposes it is ignored .
But at least in two distinct cases where we are handling very high substrate concentrations of the order of say greater than 50 or 60 % weight by volume or in cases where we are carrying out reactions in the non polar medium , water activity also becomes a key parameter for study under enzyme kinetics because then it controls the rate of enzymatic reaction and therefore it must be taken into account .
So when we talk of enzyme kinetics we are looking into the molecular dynamics of various species that are involved in the reaction , their interconversions and the effect of those inter conversions on the rate of reactions as a function of different parameters that are listed here .
There are three major constituents in any kinetic analysis .
As I mentioned earlier the first and probably the most important are the experimental data .
With the start of experimental data one assume certain mechanistic hypothesis that means how various molecules involved in the reaction are interacting and you propose some kind of a mechanistic hypothesis or in other words you can say in a simplistic term the sequence of reaction steps that are involved in converting substrate into product and based on these mechanistic hypothesis or reaction steps we arrive at a rate equation using mathematical analysis .
This rate equation again has to be verified with more experimental data .
If it befits the experimental data , if it predicts or gives you a close relationship with experimental data it is acceptable , both the rate equation as well as mechanistic hypothesis we have assumed are acceptable .
If not we again go back to the mechanistic hypothesis modify it , revise it , in the light of the deviations and then again go back to a new rate equation and therefore such an analytical sequence continues till we are able to match our rate expression with the experimentally observed data .
In a very simplistic term the rate equation is a mathematical expression that depicts the reaction process in terms of rate constants .
I think we must appreciate that the rate equation has a very new dimension in terms of rate constants .
A large number of rate constants might be involved depending on the number of reaction sequence steps and substrate and product and other chemical species if involved .
It also serves as a link between experimentally observed data and the possible reaction sequence steps .
These three parameters or these three steps are the critical steps in study of any kinetic system and applies to also the enzyme kinetics .
The second question that might emerge in your mind is why do we study enzyme kinetics ?
What is the function ?
I think the first and foremost and probably the most trivial function that could be understood is to get a certain optimum set of parameters for carrying out the reaction .
For example when we consider the optimum temperature of the reaction and the optimum pH for the reaction that is probably one of the primary objectives of establishing the whole kinetics analysis .
As I mentioned you will always assume a mechanistic hypothesis to arrive at rate expression .
It also gives a number of inferences about reaction mechanisms and the current accepted rate expressions for enzyme catalyzed reactions involve a hypothesis where enzyme substrate complex has to be formed .
It gives you a very big inference when we look at the reaction mechanism also and that becomes a very important part of the study of reaction mechanism itself .
It can also give you lot of insight into the biological phenomena , the kind of reactions that the enzymes carry out inside the cell at molecular level , their intercellular concentrations , their physiology , directions and regulation .
Lot of issues about the function of the enzymes within the cell can be understood and inferred from the kinetic analysis of the enzyme .
Then from the point of view of biochemical engineers probably a very important requirement for enzyme kinetic study is to design enzyme reactors .
The design of enzyme reactors , like in the case of chemical reactors is based on kinetic pattern .
The kind of kinetics the reaction follows dictates very often the choice of reactor types , the design parameters for the reactor and they all involve enzyme kinetics and that becomes quite important tool for reactor design .
Finally from academic point of view I think the enzyme kinetics has also played a very important role in classification of the enzymes particularly when the same enzyme is obtained from different sources their kinetic characterization gives you a very good tool to distinguish between them and use them so that you can understand and identify the enzyme based on the kinetic characteristics .
Also even as an analytical tool you can use when we want to determine many of the metabolite concentrations using enzymes , the basis of the design of experiment is kinetic parameters .
We will probably talk when we will come to the actual kinetic aspects .
The third point which one must look at before studying the actual enzyme kinetics is some of the historical perspectives that have gone into the study of enzyme kinetics .
The understanding in the mind of the scientists that there are some biological catalysts which catalyze a number of reactions particularly the key reaction which people have understood then thanks to the availability of alcoholic beverages that the yeast possesses some enzyme which hydrolysis sucrose into glucose .
In those days the alcoholic fermentation enzyme was called as zymase although that kind of nomenclature is no longer valid .
The first enzyme in the whole reaction sequence was invertase which hydrolyses sucrose into glucose and fructose and that was essentially the a key enzyme which people were ready to study .
Many of the kinetic analysis in the early stages when I say early stages I am referring to the late 18th century or early 19th century when people tried to understand the kinetic behavior and I think one of the earliest recorded interpretations or results of the kinetic analysis of enzyme was by O ’ sullivian and Tompson as early as 1890 .
He also studied the same enzyme and probably concluded in a very broad fashion that the enzyme reaction rates are influenced by acidity and enzyme concentration .
These are the two parameters which today we understand as pH and the temperature .
He did not propose any basic hypothesis but suggested based on his experimental observations that with every ten degree centigrade rise in temperature the reaction rate doubles .
As a rule of thumb it is still valid today .
He also gave a good clue which became a landmark in the applications of enzymes that enzymes are more stable in the presence of a substrate .
In fact many of the enzyme preparations then could be stored in the presence of substrate and that was another conclusion or observation he gave way back in 1890 .
We store enzyme in the presence of substrate at low temperatures so that reaction rate is stopped during storage .
The low temperature was always understood phenomena that at low temperatures the enzymes will have a much better stability .
They didn ’ t have any concept of enzyme substrate complex in those times and he only gave a hypothetical suggestion that one could store the enzyme at low temperature in the presence of substrate .
His observations were all based on hydrolysis of sucrose by invertase .
Then the second major kinetic observations came from Brown , also in the early 19th century and he proposed for the first time the concept of an enzyme substrate complex .
He also proposed based on experimental observations that the reaction rate for an enzyme catalyzed reaction that is conversion of substrate into product follows saturation kinetics .
That means the rate increases initially and reaches to a saturation level .
He did not give any experimental or any hypothesis or any sequence of steps but he was able to understand that the basic reaction kinetics follows a saturation behavior .
The rate increases to a maximum level and then stops at that and beyond that there will be no increase in the reaction rate .
At low substrate concentrations the enzyme reaction rate is proportional to substrate concentration .
That is the phenomena we still understand , now with our detailed understanding of enzyme kinetics today .
These are the broad observations by Brown .
The major breakthrough in the enzyme kinetics was Michaelis and Menten as early as 1913 .
At that time we had great limitation of analytical methods .
In most cases analytical procedures was not available to quantitatively measure the concentration of product .
The concept of buffers was in a very primitive stage .
Buffers were not a very common tool to be used in the kinetic analysis .
Then they didn ’ t have much understanding of the stability of the enzyme as well .
Thirdly the enzymes they used were really not available in the highly purified state .
What they were talking was with crude enzymes preparations and so the observations they could get were very limited .
One of the major contributions of Michaelis and Menten was that he confirmed Brown ’ s observation that enzyme substrate interaction undergoes formation of enzymes substrate complex .
That is E + S E - S He also proposed that this interaction is reversible in nature and he was the first person to propose a mechanistic hypothesis which is followed by enzyme catalyzed reactions .
This enzyme substrate complex then breaks irreversibly to form the product and enzyme is released back .
That was the hypothesis he proposed and probably is one of the landmark contributions in the study of enzyme kinetics even today .
Secondly he could also generate data using buffered substrate .
For the first time he carried out reactions under controlled pH .
Then the third thing was that he introduced another concept .
The first contribution was enzyme substrate complex , the second was buffered substrate .
The third and another important feature was that he said that when we talk of rate of reaction we must talk only of initial rate of reaction , vo .
vo = ( dp / dt ) t = 0 He said that once a significant quantity of product is formed the kinetic behavior changes .
The enzyme follows a kinetic behavior which can only be understood at the initial reaction rate that means when you carry out the reaction the rate of product formation at time zero .
The fourth thing was he confirmed the concept of enzyme substrate complex .
He also mentioned that the interaction between enzyme and substrate to form enzyme substrate complex is in perfect equilibrium .
It reaches equilibrium at a very short time and then the reaction proceeds further to form the product .
Based on this hypothesis he developed his rate expression .
If you can write down the rate constant k1 , k2 and k - 1 for the three reaction steps that are involved in this case , one can write down the rate expression using equilibrium hypothesis .
That means at the equilibrium K1 [ E ] [ S ] = k - 1 [ ES ] and this by series of interpretations and using enzyme conservation equation , E0 = [ E ] + [ ES ] The total enzyme concentration then , at equilibrium is distributed between enzyme substrate complex and free enzyme .
Substituting the value of ES from equilibrium analysis you can come down to a initial reaction rate vo = k2 [ E - S ] If you look at the original mechanistic hypothesis proposed by Michaelis and Menten , you can write k2 P + E .
So , you can write k2 [ E - S ] will be the initial rate of reaction .
Substituting the various parameters you get vo = k2 [ E - S ] = k2 [ E ] 0 [ S ] 0 / k - 1 / k1 + S So you get initial rate expression where the initial reaction rate in terms of initial enzyme concentration and substrate concentration are given .
The rate constant here as you notice is k1 , k - 1 and k2 .
The term k2E0 was saturation reaction rate when all the enzymes were saturated with the substrate that is bound to substrate .
This hypothetical situation will never emerge because there will always be equilibrium between enzyme , free enzyme , substrate and the enzyme substrate complex .
But hypothetical situation is that if all the enzyme is say saturated with the substrate then you have a maximum reaction rate which is called Vm .
Also k - 1 / k2 ratio of two rate constants k2 and k - 1that means the ratio of two rate constants which is involved in the break down of the ES complex , either ES complex can go to product formation or it can go back to substrate complex .
The ratio of the two was considered as Kd , the dissociation constant of ES .
At the time of Michaelis and Menten , there was no proposal of Michaelis and Menten constant .
He only proposed the dissociation constant of enzyme substrate complex .
The graphical representation of such reaction will be substrate concentration versus initial reaction rate .
It will follow saturation behavior where the saturated reaction rate reaches to a value of Vm , which is nothing else but k2 [ E0 ] and the reaction rate at half the value of maximum reaction rate was defined as Kd , dissociation constant .
With that concept he was able to determine the dissociation constant of enzyme substrate complex formation .
He also proposed that this substrate concentration at which the reaction rate reaches half the Vm value which is the dissociation constant also has direct implication with the affinity of enzyme to substrate .
It is substrate concentration at which the reaction reaches half of the saturation behavior and therefore it directly implies the affinity behavior and is being represented in the terms of dissociation constant .
This was the major contribution which for a long time was valid until the time another major contribution which came in the enzyme kinetics was by Briggs and Haldane in 1925 .
Mind it that J.B.S .
Haldane was one of the scientist who did all of his work in India .
They proposed a hypothesis that Michaelis - Menten hypothesis is very correct in most of the respect except that they did not agree that the interaction between enzyme and substrate is that of equilibrium behavior .
Instead of equilibrium behavior they mentioned in the case of rate terms a steady state behavior .
That means again they assumed the same thing E + S X E + P They also expanded the whole hypothesis .
Instead of the enzyme substrate breaking down to irreversible step in many reactions which are known to be reversible in behavior , like the isomerization of glucose to fructose the true reversible enzyme reaction and there are many such examples where the reaction can be catalyzed in either direction .
Therefore he also considered that the second step in the sequence is also reversible .
We need not limit it to an irreversible behavior and he also mentioned that instead of having an equilibrium behavior here we have a steady state behavior which means the rate of change of x is zero with time .
After a very short interval of time when the reaction starts , concentration of enzyme and the enzyme substrate complex reaches a constant value and if you look at the time scale for the enzyme catalyzed reaction , this is concentration axis .
Then enzyme concentration goes down , the enzyme substrate concentration builds up and this is the enzyme concentration and this is ES concentration .
This is short time .
When I show it in expanded view , this time scale is probably only for few seconds .
This time scale up to here is only a few seconds which he named as induction period .
You can call it transient state or free steady state period also but as soon as this transient period , which is very short time , passes both the enzyme substrate complex and rate of formation of enzyme substrate complex becomes a steady state and this will become zero .
Based on that he wrote his rate expression and they are almost identical rate expression as Michaelis and Menten with slight difference which we will notice .
You can write then with the assumption of ( dx / dt ) = 0 ( E0 ) = ( E ) + ( X ) X is enzyme substrate complex .
You can also take the conservation equation of substrate which will be equal to the substrate concentration plus product concentration .
S0 = ( S ) + ( P ) + ( X ) If you write all the expressions in a rate term you will find the concentration of X will be [ X ] = k1E0 [ S ] + k - 2 [ E ] 0 { P ] / k - 1 + k2 + k1 [ S ] + k - 2 [ P ] But as a matter of fact one can always neglect X because it ’ s too small a concentration compared to S .
We assume in most of the analysis that S0 is much , much greater than enzyme concentration .
The concentration of substrate , being a small molecule usually is much , much larger compared to the enzyme concentration which is used as catalyst in very small concentration .
Usually in any enzyme catalyzed reaction , the concentration of enzyme will be of the order of few milli molar or even lesser than that .
So you get the concentration of enzyme substrate complex and based on this hypothesis you get the initial reaction rate .
He also followed initial reaction rate concept as V0 = k2 [ E0 ] [ S ] / ( k - 1 + k2 / k1 ) + [ S ] If you take a general reversible equation and put p equal to zero because at p equal to zero you are considering the forward reaction only where you start with the substrate .
At the initial rate the product concentration is zero and in general expression if we write p equal to zero you will arrive at initial reaction rate .
The difference between Michaelis and Menten kinetics and that proposed by Briggs and Haldane lies in the fact that in the case of Michaelis kinetics they proposed the dissociation constant k - 1 / k1 ( k - 1 + k2 / k1 ) They named as this parameter ( k - 1 + k2 / k1 ) as Michaelis Menten constant in honour of Michaelis and Menten to recognize their contribution because bulk of the ideas they got in the whole analysis from the Michaelis and Menten assumptions .
In fact Michaelis Menten himself never proposed or gave the name as Michaelis Menten constant .
He always talked of dissociation constant which is a very fundamental parameter in the physical chemistry .
The constant which Briggs and Haldane proposed was not developed by Michaelis and Menten .
Briggs and Haldane ’ s parameter of rate constant ( k - 1 + k2 / k1 ) was named as Michaelis and Menten constant which is analogous to dissociation constant .
The difference between the two parameters is k2 / k1and two parameters will become identical if we assume that the k2 is much , much less than k - 1 , if the k2 is assumed to be very , very small rate constant compared to k - 1 .
In most cases it is true and that is why even the dissociation constant concept is feasible .
In most cases the rate of break down of enzyme substrate complex is the reason why many of the enzyme reaction are noted to be very slow in terms of the rate processes .
The term k2 , the rate constant k2 is usually in many cases it is fast also like for example in the case of invertase itself k2 has significant magnitude .
But in many enzyme catalyzed reactions the k2 is very , very small compared to k - 1 .
Therefore the two hypotheses provide you a very similar inference as far as the kinetic function of enzymes are concerned .
The concept of Vm the maximum reaction velocity , the concept of Michaelis Menten constant , the physical significance of these two parameters which are the critical parameters also remain the same even with Briggs and Haldane .
To summarize the results of the Michaelis Menten kinetics and Briggs and Haldane kinetics , we have two kinetic parameters which can characterize any enzyme catalyzed reactions .
One is the maximum reaction velocity which is V0 = k2 ( E0 ) km = k - 1 + k2 / k1 Another point I like to make it clear here is Vm is not a kinetic constant .
Vm is a parameter and is not a kinetic constant .
It is a function of enzyme concentration .
If you increase enzyme concentration , the value of Vm increases .
The kinetic parameter here is k2 , the rate constant which is responsible for break down of enzyme substrate complex into the product .
Very often the k2 is also called as turn over number which is the rate limiting step in the enzyme catalyzed reaction .
The composite term the k2 ( E0 ) characterizes an enzyme in terms of saturation .
But that Vm value is at a particular enzyme concentration .
When you mention Vm as characteristic it refers to a particular enzyme concentration .
Km is a true kinetic parameter which is a …. .. parameter of the three rate constants and is typically characteristic of any enzyme function and very often Km is used as a characterizing parameter for most of the enzymes that are available .
This kind of kinetics if you look at V0 = k2 [ E ] 0 [ S ] / Km + [ S ] You will also notice a very significant trend if you look at a graphical representation , saturation kinetics , represented by a rectangular hyperbola this is Km , and this is Vm / 2 .
Unlike most of the chemical reactions you will notice that this represents a case where the order of reaction changes the substrate concentration .
Most of the chemically catalyzed reaction or chemical reactions represent a particular order of reaction , zero order , first order or second order .
In this case you will notice that at low substrate concentration , when substrate concentration is much , much smaller compared to Km you can keep km as the sort of a …. .. If it is very , very small compare to Km , you can arrive at v0 = k2 [ E0 ] [ S ] A simple first order kinetics and because k2 [ E0 ] is a constant at a given enzyme concentration and substrate concentration is a variable , it becomes a first order kinetics and the portion represented by this area is first order kinetics .
On the other extreme if you go to the concentration beyond this point when substrate concentration is much , much greater than Km v0 = k2 [ E0 ] ~ vm which means a zero order kinetics .
In between the two the enzymes follow some kind of a mixed kinetics and that is one very characteristic feature of enzyme catalyzed reactions that instead of following a fixed kinetic order it follows a changing order of reaction kinetics at the two extremes .
This has very important feature .
In most of the subsequent analysis of the kinetic parameters or the reaction rate or the reactor design to simplify the situation we often either go to the zero order design or go to the first order design very often because this expression is comparably much more complex to analyze rather than a zero order or first order design .
For most of the analysis , to understand the system either we simplify it to a zero order design and experimental data can be collected either at a very low substrate concentration range or at very high substrate concentration .
When we see the reaction rate these understanding can be used even for use of enzyme as analytical tool or the action of the enzyme itself .
All these information can be used very significantly for those purposes .
To expand further on the Briggs - Haldane ’ s kinetics based on the reversible enzyme catalyzed reaction if you recall what we got v = { k1k2 [ S ] – k - 1 k - 2 [ P ] } E0 / k1 [ S ] + k - 2 [ P ] + k - 1 + k2 The original reaction rate expression was developed by Briggs and Haldane for reversible reaction that means you carry out the reaction either from the reverse direction or in the forward direction starting from s or starting from p and you can arrive at rate expression in terms of substrate and product concentration .
From this expression you can determine the equilibrium constant for the reaction .
That means equilibrium constant is the one where the rate of forward reaction and the backward reaction are identical and the equilibrium constant the value of the concentration of product upon substrate at v = 0 will be Keq = [ P ] eq / [ S ] eq = k1 k2 / k - 1 k - 2 or in terms of the basic kinetic parameters Keq = [ P ] eq / [ S ] eq = k1 k2 / k - 1 k - 2 = vs.kp / ks.vp The expression can be arrived from the main rate expression which will give you the equilibrium constant either in terms of the rate constant .
The equilibrium constant can be monitored experimentally and that can also give you an idea of measuring or determining the individual kinetic parameters experimentally .
This you can arrive at if you put v = 0 and solve it and determine the value of Peq .
At equilibrium , reaction rate will be zero .
I will leave it to you to develop this .
I don ’ t think it will be very difficult task to do that .
Vs is the maximum reaction velocity corresponding to substrate .
That means if you carry out the reaction with substrate the maximum reaction rate velocity it reaches is Vs .
Similarly the ks is the Michaelis Menton constant corresponding to substrate s and p corresponds to the product when you start the reaction .
These data vs , ks , kp and vp will be determined experimentally on the basis of initial reaction rates and not as a general reaction .
These parameters will be determined on the basis of initial reaction rate corresponding to either s or either p .
You can write as Keq = [ P ] eq / [ S ] eq = k1 k2 / k - 1 k - 2 = vms.kp / ks.vmp One would like to understand the enzyme kinetics on the basis of the experimental data .
How to make a link between experimental data and the kinetic rate expression that was obtained by these two scientists separately ?
Today Briggs and Haldane ’ s kinetics has become a universally accepted reaction kinetics which is followed all over the world to understand the enzyme catalyzed reactions .
The major issue is how to use those data primarily for determining the km value or the vm value corresponding to the particular enzyme concentration .
Experimentally you cannot determine the vm value because it is a saturation rate asymptotic to the axis and therefore you can never reach that value experimentally .
You may reach closer to it as you increase the substrate concentration .
So an attempt was made for the treatment of experimental data so as to test or verify the hypothesis that has been proposed by Michaelis Menten initially and verified and approved or wetted by Briggs and Haldane .
The simplest way to do that was that these non linear equations if they could be converted by some means , by some modification , into a straight line relationship life will be much easier to analyze experimental data and the first attempt for that was given by Lineweaver and Burk .
Lineweaver and Burk made a very simple approach .
v0 = k2 [ E0 ] [ S ] / km + [ S ] Both these sides you take reciprocal and you can just write 1 / v0 = km / [ S ] .
1 / k2 [ E0 ] + 1 / km [ E0 ] Therefore this represents a straight line relationship between 1 / v0 and 1 / [ S ] .
That means when you plot 1 / v0 and 1 / [ S ] you get a straight line relationship with a slope equal to km / k2 [ E0 ] with intercept 1 / vm .
On the x axis also this will intersect which will be - 1 / km .
So in a very simplistic way if you can take a double reciprocal plot one can analyze the experimental data that are obtained on the rate of reaction as a function of substrate concentration and verify the hypothesis .
For most of the cases such a hypothesis has been verified and found to be proven under certain limited conditions which have to be in line with the assumptions made by the scientists .
While Michaelis - Menten kinetics is the most accepted kinetic pattern of the enzyme catalyzed reaction , most of the enzyme catalyzed reactions in practice deviate from the basic assumptions and only under certain set of conditions they obey the enzyme kinetics proposed by Michaelis - Menten or Briggs and Haldane .
I think with that we will stop at this point .
Welcome back to this course on Polymer Chemistry , and this will be the last lecture for this course .
What we will do in this lecture , we will cover , basically complete our discussion , which we are having on chemistry on polymer additives and we will talk about fire retardants , surface - active additives and reinforcing fillers today .
And then briefly talk about polymer blends and then go to the concluding remarks about this course .
Let us talk about fire retardant and we had earlier about 2 , 3 lectures , earlier we discussed the fire retardant and the evaluation techniques , and how do we measure the fire retardant properties of a polymer samples .
For example , that limited oxygen index , we talked about one of the ways to measure the fire retardants properties .
The other or a method , we talked about that method , where we burn the sample from a particular distance , under particular condition and in presences of some ignitable materials like cotton .
And then we range or rank those polymers species , depending upon how long they burn and how they burn , and whether they ignite that cotton , which is present below the sample .
One of the also important thing that about fire retardants is that , whether the polymer during the burning , whether they are generating smoke and toxic gases .
So basically , a good fire retardant polymer should not generate lots of smoke and obiviously they should not produce toxic gases .
So , fire retardants have chemicals , which are used to retard the ignition and burning of plastics , by interfering with the chemistry and or the physics of the combustion process .
Fire retardants additives enable plastics to meet various fire safety and performance standards imposed upon them , you know the application of plastics in various common public purpose like say in Aeroplane or in building materials .
Now , in those applications this fire retardants is a is a very important important criteria for regularity criteria for the polymers , to be used in those applications .
Because for example , if you talk about a building construction material , where the polymer used must be a fire retardants should not catch or ignite fire easily or if in case unfortunately , it is giving ignitable , it should not produced toxic gas or a smoke .
So , basically this properties required for the applications , where it is essential for the polymer to be fire retardant .
Now , to design a fire retardant additives , we need to consider the polymer ignitability rate of flame spreading , rate of heat release and formation of smoke and toxic gases , as we mention before .
One thing one must note that , there is no uniform FR additives , it is not that , one FR additive is best for all the polymers .
So , is basically the choice of fire additives will depend upon the prior of the polymer and the additives , basically one additive may be very good for one polymer , but the same additive may not be as good as for the other polymers .
So , it is it is essential that , the combination is chosen rightly so , no universal FR additives , performance varies with the final form of product .
And generally , highly aromatic polymers and halogen containing polymers are inherently better fire retardant .
Out of fire retardants work and they basically , prevent this ignition or combustion process , by whatever means or some means .
For example , they can reduce the or they can absorb the heat release during the combustion process , by releasing water from them .
They can form a insulating char on the combustion substrate and thus , by stopping or preventing supply of further fuel to the fire .
So , it basically stops the fire and the fire comes down , it can also interfere , it can design additives , which interfere with the chemical reactions that maintain the fire .
To maintain the fire , they are they resume that some chemical reaction happening , which are basically radical processes , which maintain the phase fire .
Now , if we can stop those chemicals reaction then basically , we can stop the spreading of the flame .
Example , this was the basis of choosing or designing fire retardants now , we talk about few additives , which work by one of these mechanisms .
For example , titania alumina trihydrate , they when in a in a fire situation , it releases water around 200 degree centigrade , which basically inhibits the combustion process .
So , that is one example of FR additive , which basically act as a fire retardant additives by absorbing heat , by releasing water .
Second mechanism by which , some of the additives may function is by forming insulating char on the substrate , as we just discuss in a minute .
And some examples are phosphorous flame retardant , phosphate ester , PVC and these are used mainly for PVC polyurethane polypropylene oxide type polymer .
Look at these are mainly inorganic material because inorganic material , they do not basically burn in those temperature .
Typically , organic you cannot use organic material for char form , for making a cement char because organic material themselves burn off .
Similarly , phosphorous containing flame retardant act as a flame retardant by forming insulating char , the other flame mechanism by which , fire retardants works is by interfering with the chemical reactions , that maintain the fire and promotes the state of the fire .
And for example , this halogenated or brominated aromatics , they emits hydrogen bromide during decomposition .
And the other halogenated compounds work that way , they basically a trap the radicals , which it is basically assumed or resumed that the radicals , which basically spread the fire .
So , this HBR or HX halogenated hydrogen halides basically , trap those radicals and prevent those chemical reactions , which spread fire and they are mainly used for polymers like nylon , polyesters , styrenics and polyolefins .
A combination of halogenated FR and antimony trioxides also used some cases and it is a the way , it is worked that on combustion with the temperature at 600 degree Fahrenheit .
This halogens form hydrochloride or hydrobromic acids , that reacts with the antimony oxides to form antimony halides or antimony oxyhalides , which basically traps those free radicals .
And prevent that chemicals reaction , which basically produces , basically it stops or prevents this thermo oxidation process is , which we generates this volatile or flammable , volatile flammable volatile organic compounds .
And it prevents formation of those flammable organic compounds volatile flammable organic compounds , they basically prevent the burning process .
So , this is the mechanism by which , halogenated FR along with antimony trioxides synergy works .
We are now will talk about next type of additives , which are surface - active agents or surface - active additives now , this additives actual work on different interfaces .
For example , polymer air interface or polymer mold interface or interface between two polymeric phases in a blend , for example .
Now , there are plenty of example of such surface active additives , what I am going to do in this next few minutes is , give examples of or give generic examples of this additives , how they work and give few examples of such additives .
Now , let us first talk about polymer additives , which work in polymer air interface , first let us talk about additives , anti - fog or anti - fogging agents .
Now , if you think about the polymer wrap , a transparent polymer wrap which are used in a grocery stores , which we use for wrapping this fruits or food materials , and they are kept in a refrigerator and a freezer .
Now , if in a normal situation what will happen , the water droplet with condense in that flame and it will hinder your visibility , somebody is visibility through that flame .
Because of , fog formation and customer will not be able to look at the food material , which is inside the wrapper .
So , he or she may not buy that material so , anti - fogging agents basically , a surface - active agent with migrate to this polymer surface .
And being hydrophilic , it measure it makes the polymer surface white hydrophilic and in a hydrophilic surface , the water droplets cannot condense into beads .
When the come in the water vapour come in contact with this surface , they actual form a thin flame of water , which does not interfere with the light , such a way , that it basically gives any reduction in the visibility through this plastic material or it does not decrease the transparency of this plastic material .
Similar types of additives is anti - stat additive or anti - static additive where , additives , which migrate to the surface and being water absorbing .
It can absorb water from the atmosphere and form a layer of water molecules , which form path ways for dissipating the static charges .
So , if there are anti - stat additives were not used during the normal usage of the plastic material , the static can static charge can generate on the surface , which might give lot of hazard to the user .
But if anti - static additives surface - active anti - static additives are used then what happened the agent surface - active agent migrate to the surface .
And they absorb water , which form channels through which , the static charge can dissipated so , there is no formation of static charge .
Easy clean or self - cleaning type additives , which are basically very hydrophobic additives , which on migrating to the surface make the polymer surface very hydrophobic , such a way such a extreme that , when the water droplet condense on it , it cannot hold on to the surface , it basically rolls off .
Because , the contact angle between the water and the polymeric surface is very high so , it basically rolls off and giving the strolling of process , it can take away that , they are the impurities , which are present in the surface .
So , basically this type of may this additives make the surface self - cleanic so or easy cleanic , the cleanic of the surface is done easily .
Next step of additives are basically use to make the polymer surface useful for biological applications , there are lots some applications , where polymers or parts of parts made of polymeric polymeric polymers are used in biological application .
In those cases , the polymer surface comes in contact with biological fluid now , the surface of the polymer should be such that , it should not interfere the normal biological processes or it should not basically introduce , or start the coagulation process in the biological fluids .
For example , when a patient goes through a open heart surgery , the blood of the patient ’ s body is taken out and by help of external machine called oxygenator , which act basically as lungs and heart .
So , it basically purify the blood and also pump into the body .
So , this oxygenator is mostly made up of polymeric materials and the membranes by which , this purification is done is also made up of polymeric material .
Now , there are so many other example I can give where , polymers are used for medical application where , they are in contact with the biological fluids , may be blood or serum or or tissues and so on .
So , the polymers must be biocompatible and hemocompatible if it is contact with real blood , anti - thrombogenic because it should not start the coagulation process .
Now , if you look at the steps or the process of what happened when a polymeric surface , or any for the matter fact , any other external surface come in come in contact with biological fluid , the first step what happen , proteins present in the bio fluid , they get absorbed on the external surface .
And subsequently , they have lots of others steps which happens following the absorption process .
Now , if we can make the polymer surface such that , this absorption of protein can be prevented or minimized .
Then we can make this polymer surface hemocompatible or anti - thrombogenity , whatever we called that of anti - fogging to protein , whatever name we can give .
And that is done typically , by using by making the polymer very hydrophilic or drafting or modifying the surface using surface - active additives , surface - active additives make the surface reach with the hydrophilic polymer .
So , that the protein coming proteins is prevented from absorbing on the surface theoritically and one of the examples of the polymers used for surface polyurethanes , polyethylene glycol , very often .
So , they are the some examples , where surface active additives are used for medical application , modifying polymer surface is , that are utilized for medical applications .
One other example is anti microbial , where basically there is some devices , which are used by many people like a computer mouse of the using , may have been used by somebody else .
So , if this is a this mouse is made up of anti , this surface is anti - microbial additives , made up by anti - microbial additives then it prevents formation of microbes on the surface of the polymers and that actually prevent spreading of microbes between among people .
And typically , surface active agents are used for this purpose , surface active agents are used basically to improve the mechanical property of the polymer surfaces like scratch scratch resistances , improved wear performances and so on .
And then some other specific examples like anti - glare , anti - piracy , these are the some examples , where surface - active agents are used .
Now , to be successful as a surface - active additives , the additives must have some attributes for example , it must be partially comfortable .
If it is completely comfortable with the polymer matrix then it will soluble in the polymer matrix so , it will not come out to the surface and if it is completely in comfortable then it will bloom out of the surface. .. So , the additives in this case , must be partially comfortable so , that it may get the surface but be in the polymer matrix .
Second , it should have low surface energy components so that , it migrates during processing technique during processing technique or molding processor , it migrates to the surface , to minimize the surface energy .
At least part of the surface , part of the additives must have a low surface energy component , it must be thermally stable .
So , that , it can survive the processing condition and it should be chemically unreactive to the base polymer , it is being used .
So , basically , these are the attributes , surface active additives must have to be successful in any application .
In some other application , which work other type of surface like polymer mold surfaces , to improve the mold release property of the polymer polymer material polymer material mole release are added .
Mold release basically , the a polymeric surface - active agent , which have long hydrophobic tail and because of , presence of this high surface low surface energy long hydrophobic tail , they migrate to the surface .
And as a result , they form a lubricating layer on the molds on the polymer surface .
So , they can be easily released from the polymer mold , the other examples of surface - active agents , which are used for this parsing a solid filler in polymer matrices .
So that , the if you use external fillers , particular fillers to disperse them well in a polymer matrices .
Some surface - active agents are used , which are basically cover our seat in the interface between the filler and the polymer matrices and thus , help the depression of the particular fillers .
Compatibilizers , they are like a lock copolymer type surface - active agents , which which go and occupy the interfaces between two polymer phases , to reduce the interfacial energy between that two polymer phases and act as a compatibilizer .
Some example or few example of surface - active additives now , like this this additives or the other additives we talked about , they could be a small organic molecules or inorganic molecules .
So , they would be polymeric or polymeric additives as well for example , this PTFE polytetraflurideethylene are added to the polymer to improve the wear resistances or coefficient of friction .
Because of , the low surface energy , it migrates to the surface during processing and the coefficient of the friction of polymers are very low .
So , they form a lubricating layer on the base polymer surface and improve the wear resistances , these are the examples of few mold release agent .
As I said there have long tail , hydrophobic tail and because of this , they migrate to the surface and and form a lubricating layer .
And which is release of the article , polymer article form the mold , examples of improving hemocompatibility or biocompatibility of polymeric surface is a tegomer , which is and PDMS .
Because of , presences of PDMS , it migrate to the surface and because of , hydrophilic nature of polycapton electron , it basically form a domains of hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions .
So , which actually have in , being the surface biocompatible or hemocompatible .
Let us move to the next set of additives , which are fillers , which are mainly use to reinforce the polymer performances mainly , benefitting the mechanical properties of the base polymers .
And many types of fillers mainly inorganic or added to polymers for different purposes and some of them are listed here .
And inorganic fillers , they themselves has high modulus so , these by adding these inorganic fillers , at least increases the modulus of the base polymer .
And some of the mover fillers , which are now a days used in polymer matrices , polymer formulation are nano - fillers .
And when they are added this nano - fillers are added to the polymer formulation , the resulting formulation or resulting polymers are called nanocomposites .
Some nanomaterials , which are used as a filler or nanoparticles , they are the particles having diameters between 1 nanometer to 100 nanometer range .
It would be silica particle titaniumdioxide and conducting particles and so on , there are many examples of such nano particles .
Nanowires or nanofibers , where it is basically whiskers or filaments with diameters in the range of 100 to 10 to 100 nanometer , having high aspect ratio .
Nanotrubes specially , carbon nanotubes because of , they are very highly potential , this single one carbon nanotube or multi one carbon nanotubes are now a days , used for different polymeric nanocomposites .
Nanoclays , they are layered two dimensional structure , having thickness in nano dimension , they also used for in nanocomposites .
And other fuller in spherical fullerenes and others also used as a nano - fillers .
Now , what it does to the base polymer , the nano - fillers actually improve the some of the properties of the base polymers like strength , modulus , toughness , heat distortion temperature , UV resistances , barrier properties , we get the example of nanoclay during the discussion of barrier properties .
It basically increases the tortuosity or increase the path to be covered by a gas to to come out of the polymer thickness .
It also increases thermal and electrical conductivity , if they are used in proper amount and their dispersion is proper .
Obviously , they also being some challenges for example , with this inorganic fillers the transparency of the base polymers is basically come down .
And that is because as we discussed earlier , differences in the refractive index between this fillers and the polymer matrix , and if the size is large then it can cause lot of scattering .
The ductility also come down along with increasing in the modulus , by this nano - fillers and thermal stability may be sometime also questionable because this might being some impurities along with this fillers .
So , that might cause some questions about the thermal stability of this polymers specially , at the high temperature or during the processing condition , one example is shown here .
This is a montmorillonite clays , which is very commonly used nanoclay and they have enlayered two dimensional structure and so , ideally to get the best property from the clay as a filler , they has to be dispersed quit well .
So , their as the layer has to be dismandled and dispersed like , what is shown here and we call this as exfoliated nanocomposite .
And that happens there , is if there is the very good interruption between the polymer matrices and the surface of these clay .
There could be intermediate scenario between these two , where the layers are separated to some extent with polymer chains in between and we call this as a intercalated nanocomposite .
Obviously , to improve property one , this type of exfoliated nanocomposite with nanoclays always preferred .
So , with with a use of this nanoclay , the base polymer it has improvement in modulus , tensile strength barrier and fire retardant property .
But , obviously , with this the transparency come down and ductility of the matrices is comes down , with this let us basically come to our discussion on polymer additives .
And there are other additives can be discussed but due to lake of time , we cannot discuss the entire list of additives used for polymeric material , what I did I did discussed the important additives , which are very commonly used in polymer industries .
Now , briefly talk about polymer blends , polymer blends is basically mixture of more than one homo polymers or copolymers .
Now , to be why there why do we require to bring or mix to polymers , sometimes what happen one polymer is not sufficient enough to meet all the strange and requirement of properties for a product .
So , sometimes by using another polymer mixed with other polymer , the properties is met so , we discuss , let us define few terms related to polymer blends , polymer blends as we know , it is a mixture of at least 2 polymers or copolymers .
And miscible polymer blend is a mixture of polymers , which are homogeneous at molecular level .
Remember , we talked about while discussing with Tg , glass condition temperature , we discussed that this miscible polymer blend has single Tg .
Basically , they are molecularly soluble with each other so , they are homogeneous at molecular level and of mixing for this type of blends is negative .
So , they are thermodynamically miscible , immiscible polymers blends were the individual polymers components are phase separated .
So , they are thermodynamically immiscible the mixing is positive .
Now , for application point of view , immiscible polymer blends is is not useful because then what happen during processing , they delaminate from each other .
Because they are not miscible at all , they come out and you have the delamination problem , one layer comes out .
Whereas , miscible polymers blend is also not desirable from , in practical point of view because if it is miscible then you get the property , which is average of those 2 homopolymers .
So , you do not get best of the two polymers , which are mixed for making the blends so , it is always preferred to make blends , which are partially miscible or comfortable we say , we use the term comfortable , where the individual phases of those polymers are maintain .
But the interfaces are somehow , compatibilized using compatibiliser like block copolymers made up of two different homopolymers .
So , basically interface between those two phases are stitched so that , they are not immiscible to that extent , that they delaminate , but they are not also miscible so , you can get the base properties of those two polymers as well .
So , we talked about compatible polymer blend and polymer alloy are basically immiscible polymer blends with modified interface .
Now , if you look at the thermodynamics of mixing , we discuss that Flory - Huggins Flory - Huggins theory of polymer solubility .
Where we have seen that , entropy of mixing is given by k t N one l N 5 1 N 2 l N 5 2 remember , we did this expression and of polymer solution where , N 1 is the number of molecules of component 1 , N 2 his for component 2 and 5 1 and 5 2 are the volume fraction of first component and second component .
Now , if we increase the molecular weight if we increase the molecular weight of the polymer what happen , this number of molecules comes down .
So , the entropy of mixing contributes less and less to the mixing energy so , if you have very high molecular weight then the entropy of mixing is basically negligible .
So , the high molecular weights blends or the polymer mixing is not entropy is given so , it is basically the entropy of mixing what determines , either two polymer will be misicible or not .
So , if entropy of mixing entropy of mixing is negative enough then the polymers will make miscible blend and if there even 0 then aslo because of , slight entropy contribution , they may form misicible polymer blend .
What if this is positive then obviously this will form immiscible polymer blend now , to have a negative value of entropy of mixing , there should be some specific interaction between the polymers .
And those specific interaction are shown here , some of them are this hydrogen bonding , ionic interactions or electron donor acceptor complex types .
So , basically , what am what we need to know that because of , the high molecular weight of the polymers , the entropy of mixing is not contributing significantly to the energy of mixing .
So , it is basically the entropy of mixing , which entropy of mixing which determines whether a polymer will blend , will form miscible blend or not .
We shall be clear with few example , let us talk about two molecules decane and substitute methyl substitute decane like 2 4 6 8 10 pentamethyldodecane .
Now , if you mix this two molecules , they will mix it easily no problem but similar polymers like polyethylene , if we increase this chain long enough , it will make polyethyl .
And if we increase the chain both sides long enough , it will make polypropylene but they do not mix mix , they do not make miscible blend .
Because , this this no specific interaction between this two polymer , their entropy of mixing is not negative and because of their high polymer their high molecular weight then tropy of mixing is not contributing enough to the energy of mixing so , they form immiscible blends .
Another example we can talk about say , Bisphenol A polycarbonate and polymethylmethacrylate , if the length or the molecular weight of the polymethylmethacrylate is high then they do not form miscible blend whereas , this two form miscible blend as long as the molecular weight of PMA is small like polymer .
So , as we increase the molecular weight , the solubility are miscibility between two polymers come down unless , there is a specific interaction , which makes the entropy of mixing negative , which happens here like polyphenyleneoxide and polystyrene .
Because of , rings of aromatic rings they can do interaction between them and because of this specific interaction , they form their entropy of mixing is negative and as a result , they form as result they form miscible blend .
So , basically to form miscible blend , the molecular weight has to be low , which is not a practical so , polymers which having high molecular weight , mixing is always governed by entropy of mixing .
And that has to become that negative , there must be a specific interaction like hydrogen bonding are pi pi or ionic interaction between the two polymer molecules .
Now , reasons for blending , as we quickly , as we have just mention this improvement with , for the base polymer develop in broad property range of material , dilute or high cost engineering resins and so on .
So , let us , we have discussed enough earlier , we can blend by just mechanical mixing , we can do solution mixing as well we can dissolve those two polymers in a cosolvent and then form a film .
After that , we can make a interpenetrating network by dissolving one polymer in another monomer and then polymerizing the monomer to make a polymer , which will make this as a interpenetrating network .
Let us come to the last very end of this course , I just want to make few concluding remark .
But this is the polymer tree where , basically we make polymers from monomers and monomers has to be characterized very well by all other techniques , to make sure that they are free of impurities .
Because , if there are impurities in the monomer , they will be carried over to the polymers and they are very detrimental for the use of the polymers .
Once you make the polymer , we have we basically understood what the different polymerization mechanism like step growth mechanism , chain growth mechanism and define specific technique polymerization technique .
We started them in detail and once a polymerization is formed , we have learned how to characterise those polymer , both from a chemical point of view , chemical characterization .
And determines their molecular weight , their solution behavior , their morphology , their thermal behavior , whether they are crystalline or amorphous so that , all we we discused how to characterise polymer completely .
Once the polymer characterize is over , we go to the processing step and finally , make the product , for the processing step we need to know few information about the polymers .
And we have not studied the processing part in detail but what I have done , I gave you the basic processing technique , which you must know to be understand the polymer completely .
And then we last few lectures we discussed the applications of polymer , in the sense that , the different polymers properties and how they are evaluated like mechanical properties and so on .
So , we discussed in so as a polymer chemist , you we very efficient in first two step monomer characterization , monomer synthesis and then polymerization process and characterisation of the polymers for synthesis .
As a polymer chemist , you probably what have to do , the processing part or the characterisation part but then you must know the techniques by which , the processing is done or the techniques or the different properties , and importantly the structure properties relationship between the property and the chemical structure .
Unless , you do not know the structure property relationship between the property , which enable the polymer to be at the final application , you cannot design the new polymers .
Last we just go back and look go back and look at the big picture a bird ’ s - eye view of the polymers , polymers applied when they met their are may be solution are in bulk They are synthesized in solution polymerization , they can be synthesized in bulk like a milk condensation polymerization .
Polymers are also can be procute though , very very less quantity from natural resources .
And these polymers are formed from monomers by polymerization different polymerization techniques .
What are the sources of this raw materials monomers , mainly they are from petroleum sources so , current end one of the important trend or requirement for polymer chemist at present is to find out natural sources .
Because petroleum sources will be over soon or sooner or later , not only the petroleum sources , the polymers made up of petroleum sources actually causes lots of environmental problem like green house gas emission and .
so on .
So , as a polymer chemist the challenge , the current challenge is to make polymers , the good which have good properties for application to be able to find application how they are how they can be made form monomers , which are sourced from natural sources .
We talked about additives , which will be added during compounding or processing , and we get either the intermediate products , which are sold in market or we can get the simple shaped final product like sheets , film etc .
And some of the and some will take these resins in plates or granular form and then make the other additives to make the final part .
Now , after making the polymer product , what is the fate of the polymer , this is again another very contemporary topic of polymer waste .
In a lots of governments are banning plastics , plastic bags mainly because the waste it generates are not degradeable and so , basically , they creates lots of environmental hazards .
So , waste management of polymeric materials is a very important step and like the one , where polymers are need to be synthesized or produced from natural sources .
Again this is another contemporary , very important topic for a polymer researcher that , what happened after .
So , new researcher a researcher should focus on to make efficient base management of the polymers , which are used for different application .
If they can make biodegradable that is , fine .
If they are not able they are not biodegradable then if base whether they can be recycleable again to meaningful product or if they are not biodegradable or recyclable then how they the waste can be managed .
So , that is one of the very important question for polymer chemist at this movement and obviously now a days , polymers are finding newer and newer applications , not polymers or not only applies for the commodity applications .
The polymers are now getting and finding applications is very , very high in products specially , also in health care related products .
So , with this , I come to the conclusion of this course and thank you , for being with me with this course and good luck to you .
And I leave my email address , in case you need to contact , with a need for any reason .
Thank you .
We had earlier discussed the reactor performance equations for three different types of reactors that I used for carrying out the enzyme catalyzed reactions ; that is batch , plug flow reactor and continuous stirred tank reactor .
While the choice of the batch reactor is primarily based on many factors other than the reactor performance mainly on the basis of the additional requirements of the reaction .
For example if you require a very stringent pH control or a temperature control or addition of a secondary substrate at a different period other than the beginning of the reaction then batch reactor provides you operational convenience ; a better term would be the use of batch reactor is based on certain operational conveniences .
But based on the reactor performance the choice remains between use of a CSTR and a PFR and here I have given a summary of the reactor performance equations for CSTR and PFR and three different kinetic designs .
The first line indicates the reactor performance with respect to Michaelis Menten kinetics and the second line refers to when the reactor performance is in the zero order of the design that means when substrate concentration is much higher than the Km value and the third line is in the first order design when the substrate concentration is less than the Km value .
When we say higher or less than the Km value , when we compare substrate concentration with the Km value , what we are looking at in the case of zero order regime , we often look at the Km value ; K ' m is usually less than 0.01 S0 .
That means substrate concentration is almost hundred fold or more than the Km value .
Similarly in the case of first order regime it is again the same thing that the K ' m is usually greater than 10S0 ten fold increase usually gives you a reasonable performance towards a first order regime As you have noticed that in the case of zero order regime the reactor performance is identical in both the cases in CSTR and plug flow reactor excepting that the magnitude of the tau is altered by epsilon that is voidage .
Otherwise the reactor performance in the zero order regime is identical .
On the other hand in the case of a first order regime the performance of PFR , if you look from the point of view of fractional conversion the fact of fractional conversion on the quantity of enzyme required or the value of the space time , to be able to compare the reactor performance , what we need is to look at two different things : the fraction of conversion and the quantity of enzyme required .
These two parameters can be looked at from these expressions .
We also looked at the relative quantity of enzyme required in CSTR to PFR which is given by this ratio and here you will notice that as we increase the fractional conversion the relative quantity of enzyme required for a first order regime significantly increases in the case of CSTR .
In the zero order regime there is no difference .
So therefore when we shift from zero order to first order regime the efficiency of plug flow reactor improves interms of its enzyme requirement or even in terms of space time .
For example there are two parameters : either you can keep the space time constant and increase the enzyme loading ; or keep the enzyme loading constant and the space time can be varied .
In the case of PFR the space time required will be much less compared to CSTR in the first order regime .
In the zero order regime the space time will be identical in the two cases .
The intermediate regime is that where Km and S0 are of comparable value .
That means let us say between one and ten .
That means S0 is something like about five Km values .
In that case the performance will be dependent not only on the magnitude of the fractional conversion but also on the magnitude of Km value and the relation between S0 and Km .
the performance will be dictated .
To give you a quantitative picture under three distinct conditions here I have taken three different fractional conversions 0.8 , 0.9 and 0.99 .
I must also state here that ideally for most of the enzyme catalyzed reactions we will try to aim at the fractional conversion as high as possible .
Hundred percent is perfect but very often you may not be able to test that and one will like to have fractional conversion anywhere between 0.9 and 0.99 .
That is usually the pattern if the reaction is irreversible practically irreversible .
So under those conditions and assuming S0 equal to1M and epsilon of 0.5 , the Erel in the case of first order regime at 0.8 is 1.24 .
They are any units ; don ' t bother about units .
But these are relative ratio ; so the 1.24 .
As soon as you go to 0.9 conversion , the relative quantity of enzyme required is 1.95 ; almost about one and half times .
But when you go from 0.9 to 0.99 , the relative quantity of enzyme becomes more than five times and it very significantly increases the relative quantity in the first order regime .
If you consider from 0.8 to 0.99 , the ratio is still higher and the same relationship will also hold good for space time .
If the enzyme loading is constant , then the tau will also have the similar ratio because in our reactor performance equation the left hand side is K2E0 ?
equal to so and so .
Therefore both have the same relationship as far as the fractional conversion is concerned .
In the case of zero order regime there is no complication whatever is the fractional conversion the relative quantity required are identical ; the same space time .
On the other hand in the case of Michaelis Menten kinetics when the Emrel and S0 are comparable , it will vary and it will be a function of Km ; what the magnitude of Km is in comparison to substrate concentration .
We have chosen one molar here .
There is another point besides the fractional conversion ; the enzyme quantity required and the space time required .
Another important parameter of the reactor design when we defined the parameters is reactor productivity that is Pr and is defined as XS0 / ?
. You will notice that the reactor productivity also is linked with the fractional conversion .
In the case of the two types of reactor , the reactor productivity is directly linked with the fractional conversion and as it is also linked with the tau , inversely propositional to tau if the tau increases the productivity goes down .
Therefore the fractional conversion , whatever we have discussed about relative quantity of enzyme or the space time as a function of fractional conversion a reverse phenomena or the reverse behavior is true for productivity .
When you increase fractional conversion the productivity will go down and for the first order regime the productivity of PFR will be much , much higher than the CSTR .
I was trying to relate productivity and the quantity of enzyme or the space time .
The quantity of enzyme required and the space time are almost analogous parameters .
Their behavior on the basis of the fractional conversion is identical .
But the effect of the fractional conversion on reactor productivity is just reverse because tau appears on the denominator , XS0 / ?
. So if the tau decreases more significantly with fractional conversion the productivity will increase more significantly and therefore in the case of first order regime , the productivity as a function of fractional conversion increases much faster in the case of PFR than CSTR .
The quantity of enzyme required or the value of tau increases more in the case of CSTR with increasing fractional conversion but the productivity increases more drastically in the case of PFR when fractional conversion is increased .
But in general with increase in fractional conversion the productivity will go down in both the cases because in the reactor performance equation the decrease in tau will be much faster compared to increase in fractional conversion .
In general there will be a decline in productivity as fractional conversion increases but the relative decrease will be more pronounced in the case of CSTR than in PFR .
No tau .
Relative decrease of productivity , the tau and productivity are related inversely .
Therefore the tau increases with increase in fractional conversion more pronouncedly in the case of CSTR , the reverse may happen in the case of productivity .
Therefore I think one should very clearly understand the relationship between fractional conversion , enzyme quantity required or the space time and productivity .
Very often the choice of the right type of reactor whether to use a CSTR or a PFR is dependent upon the type of the reaction system we are looking at .
For example in case we are talking of a very high value product say for example .... transformations , a pharmaceutical product where the cost of product or the cost of substrate is very high .
You don ' t want to waste the substrate .
Then in such case we would like very high fractional conversion .
We will not like any substrate to remain unconverted because the cost of substrate is very high and even at the cost of productivity you go for higher fractional conversion .
The productivity will decrease ; but even that is desirable to have a higher fractional conversion and a lower productivity .
On the other hand if you are talking of a lower or reasonable value product or in those cases where even the unconverted substrate can be used along with the product you don ' t have to separate the product for application as in the case of glucose fructose syrup when you isomerise glucose to fructose the final product is a mixture of glucose and fructose .
We never attempt to get the reaction converted to completion because then the residence time , space time required in the reactor will be very , very high because it ' s a reversible reaction .
Therefore the final reaction product usually is an equilibrium mixture of glucose and fructose where the fractional conversion is only 0.4 or 0.45 not even 0.8 .
But the advantage is that the ultimate mixture of glucose and fructose is used as the product .
No separation is attempted .
So in those cases lower fractional conversion but we keep very high stake on productivity ; productivity is tried to be maximized .
The cost of the product is not very high so productivity becomes very important parameter .
But if the cost of the product is very high which also requires to be separated from unconverted substrate then it will be desirable to have a high fractional conversion even at the cost of productivity .
So we must clearly understand the inter relationship between the kinetic order regimes , the fractional conversion and the productivity and the parameter which is very important in the case of reactor performance is the effect of substrate and product inhibition .
Most of the enzyme catalyzed reactions will experience some kind of inhibition .
One inhibition as we talked that you can add a third component in addition to substrate and product and add another inhibitor either for any purpose of study or anything usually but that doesn ' t come into picture when we talk of industrial reactions using enzymes because we will not like to add inhibitor to the system for carrying out the enzyme catalyzed reaction for commercial purposes .
But still most of the enzyme catalyzed reactions are inhibited naturally by either substrate or the product ; the product is a very common case .
Inhibition by product is a very general feature for all enzyme catalyzed reactions but some enzyme reactions are also inhibited by substrate and this effect because the concentration profile of substrate and product in the two cases of PFR and CSTR are different .
For example in the case of CSTR the concentration of substrate in the reaction mixture is very , very low , same as in the outlet or in other way the concentration of product is very high in the reaction mixture .
So if a system experiences product inhibition and you use a CSTR you are making the reaction going at very high product concentration .
That means in extremely inhibited conditions the reaction rate can be very , very slow .
On the other hand the reverse might be true in the case of plug flow reactor and so the incorporation of effect of substrate and product inhibition on the reactor performance equation becomes very important .
While we are considering all other conditions of the isothermal operation or partitioning effect , diffusional limitations are still valid .
We are still talking about idealized the vectors we are only changing the kinetic part .
That means if we consider and if we let us take a general case of substrate inhibition where the reaction rate is given by v = k2E0 ( 1 + K ' m / S + S / Ks ) This is a general kind of expression .
Ks is the substrate inhibition constant , dissociation constant and Km is the natural Km value for the reaction .
If you recall we discussed substrate inhibition kinetics in which the excess of substrate causes binding of two substrate molecules to the enzyme molecule and which becomes a dead end complex .
Under that condition at in the case of CSTR you can develop the reactor performance equation for such system also on the same lines as we did for Michaelis Menten kinetics .
That means you make a mass balance across the reactor , simplify it and the final reactor performance equation for this case for CSTR is XS0 + K ' m ( X / 1 - X ) + S20 / KS ( X - X2 ) = k2E0 ?
In the case of PFR the same reaction expression will result in XS0 - K ' m ln ( 1 - X ) + S20 / 2KS ( 2X - X2 ) = k2E0 e ?
The reaction performance equation gets modified and as you will notice that in the case of substrate inhibition , the performance of CSTR will be far superior .
If you can use these two equations and substitute arbitrary values for fractional conversion at a given substrate concentration the performance of CSTR works out to be far superior compared to a plug flow reactor because the concentration of substrate at any given time physically is much lower than in the case of PFR which for bulk part , more than half of the part , substrate concentration is very high only in the upper half .
The substrate concentration goes down and the reaction rate varies in the PFR along the length of the reactor .
If you look at product inhibition , product inhibition also has influence in two modes .
Either the product can inhibit competitively or non - competitively .
Uncompetitive cases are rare and as I mentioned earlier also in most cases the inhibition patterns are usually either competitive or non competitive .
In the case of product inhibition the reaction rate is given by v = k2E0 1 + K ' m / S ( 1 + P / K ' p ) K ' p is the inhibition constant which is the competitive inhibitor of the reaction .
In this case also one can write down the reactor performance equation for CSTR as S0X + K ' m ( X / 1 - X ) + K ' m / KP ( S0X2 / 1 - X ) = k2E0 ?
In the case of plug flow reactor the reactor expression will be S0X ( 1 - K ' m / KP ) - K ' m ln ( 1 - X ) [ 1 + S0 / KP ] = k2E0 ?
e Even in the case of an uninhibited reaction the relative performance of PFR as the fractional conversion increases is superior .
But in the case of a reaction that undergoes product inhibition the performance still becomes more superior .
Relative quantity of enzyme required or the relative value of the space time required in PFR for increased fractional conversion is much , much higher in the case of CSTR compared to PFR .
On the other hand the analogous relations in the case of non - competitive product inhibition where the reaction rate can be given by v = k2E0 [ 1 + K ' m / S ] [ 1 + P / K ' p ] The CSTR reactor performance comes out at XS0 + K ' m ( X / 1 - X ) + K ' m / KP.1 - X / S0X2 + X2S20 / Kp = k2E0 ?
In the case of PFR the expression is arrived XS0 ( 1 - K ' m / K ' P ) - K ' m ln ( 1 - X ) [ 1 + S0 / K ' P ] + S20X2 / 2K ' P = k2E0 ?
e When the enzyme is subjected to inhibition by excess substrate , it is more serious in the case of a plug flow reactor ; effect of inhibition on the reactor performance is more detrimental in the case of PFR .
The situation can be slightly improved if you make intermittent feeding of the line ; for example you use a plug flow reactor in which the feeding is done at more than one point .
That means you don ' t use a high substrate concentration right at the beginning .
Such modifications can always be looked at .
On the other hand the effect of product inhibition is more serious particularly when high conversions are required .
So it is not only the effect of product inhibition which is more serious in the case of a CSTR compared to PFR but when high fractional conversions are required the product inhibition becomes even more serious .
The product inhibition is more detrimental in CSTR compared to PFR because the concentration of product is much higher in the case of CSTR .
But when higher fractional conversions are required the problem becomes more and more serious because the product concentration is high when the fractional conversion required is high and therefore in those cases the plug flow reactor becomes almost a necessity .
That is one of the reasons that in the literature a large number of immobilized enzyme systems have been reported to be used in a plug flow reactor mode rather than a CSTR mode unless there is the requirement of pH control or in some cases when you want to add another constituent at a later stage .
These are the standard kind of inhibition patterns which we are familiar with ; substrate inhibition or a product inhibition which is non competitive or competitive .
I don ' t consider it necessary that a third inhibitor to be added it can be either substrate or product which can cause inhibition which has to be taken into account while making a reacted regime while analyzing the reactor performance .
These are theoretical situations which are comparatively simpler .
In many practical situations the inhibition patterns are usually complex .
They are not as simple .
For example I have illustrated here the analysis of penicillin to six APA and phenylacetic acid by penicillin acylase .
This is an enzyme catalyzed reaction which is used commercially all over the world and particularly 6 - amino pencillanic acid is used as the intermediate for synthesis of ampicillin and today because the use of penicillin as an oral drug has reduced significantly excepting for application .... ointment .
But whenever it has to be administrated orally you always look for derivatised penicillin and ampicillin is a major product where six APA is .... here .
In such a case you see the reaction is inhibited both by P as well as A .
Both the products inhibit the reaction .
For the sake of writing the rate expression I named as P and A and in the case of A it is inhibited competitively .
A is a competitive inhibitor and P is a non - competitive inhibitor.You can also arrive at cases we there is substrate inhibition also and life can be very , very complex in such cases .
For example in this practical case of penicillin acylase catalyzed hydrolysis of penicillin the kinetic rate expression comes as k2.E0 v = 1 + K ' m / S ( 1 + A / Kia ) + P / Kip ( 1 + K ' m / S ) They have developed the reaction performance equations but the quantitative comparison of CSTR and PFR in such cases will become more and more complex .
Before taking of the final design or analysis of the reactor system one need to look at the reactor performance equation based on actual reaction kinetics which is applicable and in this case I can site you the reference .
The case of penicillin acylase in detail manner has been analyzed and the reactor performance compared by Warburton and associates in Biotech .
Bioengineering volume fifteen , page thirteen , nineteen seventy three .
That is one case which illustrates the use of reaction kinetics for the design of or for the analysis of the reactor performance for any given practical enzyme catalyzed reaction which is not a theoretical one but which has been used practically and the process of the system is commercially used all over the world .
Besides the inhibition pattern the next step if you recall is the relative concentration of feed substrate and the magnitude of S0 / Km and the kinetic regime of the reaction .
We have also seen the fractional conversion and productivity .
The third item we have seen is the inhibition pattern which the kinetic reaction follows and probably another pattern which is very , very important in analyzing the immobilized enzyme reactors is the reactor type and operational stability .
One of the most important motivating factors for looking at immobilized enzyme was the operational stability .
That means you can use them continuously over a very long period of time and we must also look at how the reactor type influences the operational stability .
The system which is more operationally stable has also some desirable features even at the cost of productivity or fractional conversion all those parameters taken separately .
We can divide the operational stability in two major patterns .
One of the major patterns is where the thermal deactivation or the loss of enzyme activity during continuous use is independent of substrate concentration .
That means irrespective of substrate concentration in the reactor the inactivation rate is constant and which can be given by - dE / dt = kd.E A first order decay rate constant that is what we are familiar with .
In such cases the life is simple because the substrate concentration is not involved .
The reactor performance can be simply considered on the basis of thermal deactivation and if you replace in your idealized reactor performance equation instead of E0 , if you just transfer it to E0.e - kdt where t is the operational time , you can get the modified reactor performance of the effect of operational stability on the reactor performance .
In such cases you see the performance for CSTR .
We are comparing the reactor performance at two different times say from zero time to time t how does the reactor performs .
In the case of CSTR kd.t = ln S0X0 + K ' m ( X0 / 1 - X0 ) / S0Xt + K ' m ( Xt / 1 - Xt ) Here the X0 and Xt are the fractional conversion in the case of CSTR with a time zero and t .
We are considering all this reactor performance under steady state conditions .
Once the steady state has been achieved at time t equal to zero , the fractional conversion is X0 and after the elapse of time t fractional conversion declines as a result of enzyme deactivation and that is the fractional conversion Xt .
In the relationship Kd.t , t is the time of reactor operation .
Mind it ; this t should not be confused with the space time .
Space time is kept constant over the reactor operation , over a period of time t and only the fractional conversion is declining from X0 to Xt and this gives you the reactor performance or the effect of operational stability on the reactor performance in CSTR .
On the other hand in the case of PFR the corresponding relationship is kd.t = ln S0X0 - K ' m ln ( 1 - X0 ) / S0X0 - K ' m ln ( 1 - Xt ) Here also you can consider the effect of the operational stability on the reactor performance .
If the kinetic regime of the reaction is in the zero order that means the K ' m in both the expressions will be deleted .
It will be only first term and the effect of operation stability is independent of the type of reactor .
The factor operational stability will be identical in the case of two types CSTR and PFR if we are operating on a system in the zero order regime whereas if you are operating in the case of first order regime , the first term will get out will be neglected and then the difference in conversion ..... ...... between PFR and CSTR will be magnified .
The Xt value in the two cases after the elapse of time t will be different in the two cases and the output of the PFR , plug flow reactor will decrease much faster with time than in the case of CSTR .
When you put some arbitrary values you can see that in the case of PFR or a substrate independent thermal deactivation the output that means the fractional conversion after time t will decrease much faster than CSTR .
The deactivation is not linked to the substrate concentration and therefore in such cases the CSTR will be a desirable parameter .
On the other hand if you look at the kinetic pattern of thermal deactivation , the thermal deactivation is also very common situation , because in most cases it can be understood that the enzyme is more stable in the presence of a substrate .
So higher the substrate concentration the thermal stability is more ; its Kd value is much , much less in the presence of substrate and the deactivation expression can be written as - dE / dt = ( k ' d / s ) .E Here the deactivation rate is inversely propositional to substrate concentration .
Higher the substrate concentration the deactivation rate is slow .
In such a situation for a CSTR you can very easily write the reactor performance .
kd.t = S0 ( Xt - X0 ) + S0 ln ( X0 / Xt ) + K ' m ln K ' m + S0 ( 1 - X0 ) / K ' m + S0 ( 1 - Xt ) This is for CSTR .
In the case of PFR the situation will be much more complex because the concentration of substrate across the reactor is not constant .
So the rate of deactivation also along the length of the reactor is different and therefore a simple analytical solution is difficult .
One has to probably get the reactor performance based on operational stability by a numerical solution and an analytical solution will be difficult .
But in general you will notice that in the case of substrate dependent thermal deactivation the performance of PFR will be superior compared to a CSTR .
The PFR is a desirable type of reactor where the effect of drop in the reactor performance as the result of enzyme deactivation will be much slower for substrate dependent thermal deactivation .
Or in other words in the case of substrate independent thermal deactivation the reverse is true .
The decay in the reactor performance will be more pronounced in the case of substrate independent thermal deactivation compared to CSTR .
CSTR is much more desirable .
To summarize what we have done as far as the idealized reactor systems are concerned we have originally defined our idealized reactor systems which means that we are considering the extreme fluid dynamic regimes ; back mix and plug flow .
There is no significant heat of reaction , isothermal operation .
We have not considered any of the mass transfer limitations or partitioning effect in the system and in the worst situation if you compare with the two major types of reactor systems , continuous flow reactor system , CSTR and PFR we can analyze the reactor performance for a given reaction on the basis of the relative concentration of substrate to the Km value of the reaction .
Basically it amounts to looking at the reaction kinetics .
Then we need to look at the effect of fractional conversion and productivity ; what is the desirable feature ?
Whether we are looking for high fractional conversion and that is the demand of the system or high productivity depending on the nature of the product stream .
Then we have to look also the inhibition pattern if any .
In some cases if the kinetics is much simpler one can very easily approximate it to first order or zero order or even Michaelis Menten ; the life if simpler .
But in case if there is inhibition pattern that must be taken into account for analyzing the reactor performance .
Finally the operational stability of the system as a result of or the effect of the enzyme deactivation during the continuous operation of the two different types of reactor will also be influenced by the deactivation pattern and one cannot decide absolutely whether a CSTR is desirable or PFR is desirable .
Under different sets of conditions , under the requirement of the reaction systems , the process requirement one has to make a choice and compare interms of the overall productivity or the desired parameter .
That is the sort of system that we have to look for our ideal reactor performance .
Besides ideal reactor performance we have so far not considered anything about mass transfer , non - ideal flow .
This is the practical reactor which we are talking like we talked many of the configurations like which were a combination of CSTR and ultra filtration reactor or a hollow fiber module .
They may not to be an ideal flow dynamics .
They may vary somewhere in between the two and that flow behaviour also might influence the reactor performance .
We will take those cases individually in subsequent classes .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry and in this lecture , this is lecture 16 .
We will discuss lecture on living radical polymerization ; and we will talk about three different type of living radical polymerization , ATRP , SFRP and RAFT .
We will talk about the full forms , time ; and I planned to just give you examples of commercial polymers , which are made use of this radical polymerization technique and then , we will conclude this module of radical chain polymerization at the end by giving you a brief summary of what we have learnt in radical chain polymerization .
This recap in the last lecture , we discussed in detailed a different polymerization processes , and we spent lot of time on emulsion polymerization .
And we discussed , we just introduced the concept of living polymerization and let us begin from the same page , we left in the last lecture .
Now , as we were discussing that in a normal chain polymerization process , as soon as the initiation reaction is slower , as we know initiation reaction is slower .
So , the chain initiation takes place leaving a time during almost during inter polymerization time and the propagations step is faster .
So , as an agent , a radical generates its undergo propagation reaction and at the end by molecular termination reaction have , and the polymers become dead with time you generate different molecular weight polymers and of course , these polymers are not live or dead .
So , you have much larger or broader molecular weight polymers .
Now , if we can by any means start almost all the chains at more or less same time ; that means , initiation must be faster and then , let the polymers , all these chains we just started let them under go polymerization reaction or propagation reaction for same deviation .
Then , what happen on that has to happen .
This propagation has to be much lower compared to initiation first of all and if that happen or if that has to happen , then all these polymers should be live .
That means they are reactive to the monomer .
So , they can undergo polymerization reaction , say the live you can add a second monomer and form block polymer at the end of the polymerization .
Now , how can we achieve this ?
All this point we just talked about in a normal radical reaction .
What happen is you get a radical which immediately reacts with a monomer to start the chain , and you have this , all this reaction forming RM n dot and propagation continued RM n plus 1 dot and so on and this initiation process is lower .
So , as soon as this radical generates , they undergo polymerization reaction and these two reactions n M dot plus M n dot did undergo by molecular reaction forming either M n M plus n depending upon which type of termination reaction they are undergoing .
So , at the end , you get a dead polymer .
Now , if by any means if you can know what is the rate of termination reaction ?
Rate of termination reaction we know k t M dot square , where M dot is the concentration of total radical , total propagating radical .
So , this is summation of all the concentration , of all the propagating radical present .
Now , if you can reduce this M dot , then what happens is RT comes down much lower .
If you are by any means if you can reduce this M dot , then RT comes down .
So , if you can bring down such a level that RT is insignificant , then there practically no termination reaction would happen .
In this case that will in suit that the polymers which are forming , they are not killed or the chains which has getting initiated , they are not killed .
That is one thing .
How do we achieve is M dot is very low , then what is R p ?
R P also you know this k P MM dot .
This is very slow .
Then , rate of polymerization also will be lower compared to a normal radical polymerization .
So , that ensures if you can bring down the conception of this , that ensures that the termination reaction is much low or if is basically insignificant .
Now , how do you achieve the condition where you let all the polymers , all the chains react for the same duration ?
Now , that is achieved by reversible termination or reversible transfer reaction , say I have an initiator molecule which is R z .
Typically , all time in normal reaction , we write a single arrow which means any reversible reaction .
Now , in this case we are writing double arrow which means this reversible reaction .
Now , if the structure of Z is such that its inactive radical , then this would not take part in propagating , radical propagating step .
So , only this will take part in propagation step .
Now , this will again react with the monomers and form different chain length .
Now , because this is radical , it will be again part of the equilibrium process with Z .
So , this is a case we are talking about reversible termination .
So , if this happened in normal case , if this bimolecular reaction happen , you get a termination step dead polymer , but in this case because this is reversible , this can again come back and give you back this active radical and inactive radical .
Now , if the structure of this is such that here if this equilibrium is shifted mostly towards right hand side , then what happened is this radical stays or spend most of its time in a dormant form .
This is a dormant form .
This does not take part in the polymerization reaction , where for a small fraction of their lifetime , they are present in this active form .
So , what happen in this way you are reducing the concentration of the radical active radical present and that will ensure that your termination reaction are negligible because this is a reversible termination reaction .
This radical is not under if it do not undergo any termination reaction .
It can react with a monomer and again go back to the domain form because is equilibration process or reversible process , so that all the radicals , all the propagating radicals we generate from the initial initiation reaction , they will spend more or less same amount of time in as active form and as a domain form which will ensure that all the polymer chains are progressing or reacting during or for a same number , same amount of time or same duration .
So , one more time if you have a initiator which reversibly form this R dot and z dot , where R dot is an active radical and z is inactive radical because of its structure , then what happen is only these undergo polymerization of propagation reaction and at the very beginning , the concentration of R dot is quite highest .
They will undergo some termination reaction till the concentration of z dot is much higher at very beginning and this forms , this might undergo bimolecular termination reaction .
So , you get drop in R dot concentration and you get more and more z dot at beginning once the concentration of z dot is sufficiently higher compared to R dot and also f chosen this equilibrium such a way that the equilibrium constant is towards this side .
Then , what happens is this equilibrium is shifted mainly towards this sight .
So , the average time radical , a propagating radical spend in this form which is active form which can react with the monomer and propagate much lower compared to the time , an average radical spend in dormant form or inactive form .
By this way , you are ensuring this .
After the initial period of time , the concentration of radical are small which will ensure the termination reaction is negligible and also because these are equilibrium process , every radical is coming out and going in the dormant form .
This is all .
All this time , all this propagating radical is spending same amount of time in this form .
So , they are undergoing the propagating radical for same duration which ensures that the chain length of the polymer produced is almost similar size .
So , p d I would be very narrow .
So , 1.02 to 1.1 1.2 something like this .
So , they are very close and at that the end of the reaction , again they will remain in this form .
So , you can add a second monomer to form a block polymer .
The three types of living radical polymerization .
First one is ATRP , atom transfer radical polymerization .
In this case , your initiator is a halide and you have redox reaction , where you have a q plus halide .
It can undergo reversible atom transfer reduction process , where you get R dot plus Cu Br 2 L .
L is an organic which basically complex with this copper salt , so that the copper salt remain insoluble , remain soluble in the organic solvent .
So , this now again can react with M from R M n dot , it can M 1 , M 2 and so on .
So , it happens , this happens to all the radicals and this again goes to the same reaction form , R M n Br plus Cu at l .
So , at any moment of time , the concentration of this is very small which means the termination reaction is very less because this is a part of the equilibrium .
So , one more radical it is coming out capturing a monomer , increasing the chain length , going into the equilibrium .
Second monomer , second radical is coming out reacting with the monomer and going to reaction .
So , average time this spends in terms of active form is same for all the propagating radicals .
So , chain length , all the propagating radicals are same .
Now , if I write equilibrium is constant for this reaction , this is M dot .
So , let us write this .
For this reaction , M n dot we are writing M dot and copper 2 plus .
I initiated this side is initiator which is this initiator is this and Cu plus which is this .
I am writing if you confuse .
I am writing this equilibrium reaction for .
So , this reaction , this K K of this reaction would be given by this .
So , the concentration of this propagating radical is given by K I Cu 2 plus k I plus k I Cu plus by Cu 2 plus I is R Br .
Concentration of I R is the concentration of R Br .
So , what is R p ?
Rate of polymerization will be given by k p M and concentration of the radical which is given by k p M k I Cu plus by Cu 2 plus .
So , that is the rate equation and the molecular weight would be given by the total number of monomers is reacted .
So , M 0 is the initial .
The concentration of your monomer by M t is a monomer present in time t divided by total initiator concentration which is given by the conversion M 0 by I 0 , each initiator by one radical and one radical produces one chain .
So , if you have monomer polymerized with two chains , then total decrease of polymerization will be 100 by 2 is 50 .
Now , if you plot with time , see this is experimental plot .
You get same for bulk and say if a solution you get a slower rate because this is straight line , which means that this is a first order reaction .
Example of R Br is 1 phenyl ethyl bromide and l is 4 , 4 di 5 nonyl 2 2 dash by pyridine .
So , if you have these , all the three plus styrene bulk solution , you get experimentally this .
So , what happens to the molecular weight if you plot molecular weight versus time ?
What will you get ?
Again , it is a straight line .
As time goes , no reaction forward .
So , more propagation happen .
So , the reaction molecular rate increases linearly , where in case of normal chain polymerization , you can get very high molecular even at beginning of the polymerization and in such case , the molecular rate is small at the beginning and it increases slowly after .
As the time goes , you can take a monomer and do a reaction like this , R n X a polymer and then , you can add a second monomer .
You can form a block polymer like this .
You can take a dihalide and then , you can make tri block polymer as well and for a simple case , the PDI for this sort of reaction given by this .
So , higher the molecular weight , lower is the PDI .
A second type of living radical polymer is stable free radical polymerization .
In this case , the same thing you can generate the z dot which is very stable like nitroxide triazolinyl trityl radical .
For example , I have initiator like this .
When it forms two radicals , this radical commonly known as tempo .
This is very stable .
Because of these two large groups , they cannot take part in bimolecular termination reaction among themselves .
So , that is why this radical is very stable and that can be stored for days in a container which can be used later on .
So , same thing happens in this case because you have a stable radical and this can react with same form RM n dot which again undergoes reversible reaction and form the same logic , which you discuss ATIP and do the living chain polymerization .
When this stable free radical polymerization is done through nitroxide , it is often called NM p nitroxide mediated polymerization .
So , logic , all the arguments remains similar as in the case of ATIP .
Again , this is a case of reversible termination like ATIP .
Now , the third case which is RAFT , reversible addition fragmentation transfer .
The name suggests that it take advantageous advantage of reversible transfer reaction .
Now , in this case what happens , you have the same way you have h n come to that .
You have a chain transfer agent here which is having general structure or something and gives you the more common , most common structure .
It could be something else as well , but for time being , I will just give you the most common example .
It is a dithio ester .
Now , if you have a radical which can undergo reversible addition to this S is a form R S , this is let us put at carbon .
Let us take one more time .
Getting little confused .
So , I have the chain transfer agent which has generic structure life .
It is dithio ester and I have a radical produced by normal thermal initiation of some other reactions , like thermal initiations AIVN of peroxide .
Then , it can undergo reversible addition and form this differentiate make R star , this radical .
Now , if this bond if chosen in such a way , in this case , it is higher bond that this can again reversibly fragment by homolitic cleveage .
Then , this is found , this radical can react with monomer forming M n dot .
So , this initial reaction as well as , now this can undergo similar reversible addition and common fragmentation reaction .
So , in general , we can write that it general .
So , you have a reversible , addition reversible fragmentation and this is a transfer reaction because the original radical is getting transferred and getting terminated in forming in a new radical which is a transferred reaction .
For example , a raft transfer agent is , we can give as simple example of transfer reaction .
See in case of raft reaction , what is the molecular weight ?
Again like earlier , it is the conversion multiplied by the initial mole of the monomer , and the conversion of the raft reagent plus the conversion of the initiator .
This gives you the number of chains form in case of ATIP or other reactions .
See we discussed that this is by the total initiator molecule .
Remember the expression for the ATIP ?
We had P M 0 by I 0 .
Physically , each I 0 was forming one radical and that radical was participating in a propagating chain .
So , this gives the number of monomers reacted divided by the number of chains formed which gives you the degree of polymerization and in this case , this is the transfer reaction .
So , to include the number of radicals form , the initiator molecules which is given by if it is thermal polymerization is to 5 , this is your deficiency factor and the conversion of this .
Because each raft agent forms one radical , so we have to come include the concentration of the raft agent as well as initiator concentration .
So , total like the case of transfer reaction , chain transfer reaction , we have included this .
In this case also , we have to include both these .
Now , because typically we use the I0 concentration much lower than the raft concentration , we can use N 0 .
This is the conversion of raft region .
Now , if we do reaction such a way that all the RAFT regions or did take part in the polymerization reaction , we choose the raft region such as , such a way that every raft reagent is participating in the transfer reaction .
The chain transfer position for the raft reagent we use is very high , so that all raft agents can actually be participating in the chain transfer reaction .
So , P dash becomes close to 1 .
So , finally , this becomes the raft agent concentration .
So , in this case , the molecular weight depends upon the chain transfer reagent and the chain transfer constant is much higher compared , much higher , so that all the raft agent is taking part in the chain transfer reagent and also because the concentration of the initial raft agent is much higher than original initiator radical , we can simply write the average degrees of polymerization , end of the polymerization is .
Similarly , as in case of ATIP reaction or reaction , where I 0 can be replaced by the raft reagent concentration and the beginning and again try other cases , we can utilize this raft reaction reversible addition , fragmentation transfer reaction for making block polymer at the end of the polymerization if we add a second monomer .
Now , with this , we will in this discussion living radical polymerization , what you will do is quickly go through different commercial polymerization .
Now , we will do this and go little faster because this is just information , nothing more to understand .
So , we will spend little time on these examples and if you want , you can get more information of any text book or some other literature .
This is just to complete your knowledge on the radical chain polymers .
You have studied for last 5 - 6 lectures , what is radical polymerization , radical chain polymerization and have talked about different monomer structures , but finally , it matters or it is useful if some commercial polymers have made using these techniques .
So , once you know that there are several polymers which are made using this technique , then your learning will be complete in that sense .
Now , the simple monomer is all polyethylene and polyethylene is synthesized at high pressures and temperature above the melting temperature , its melting temperature .
Now , remember this is a gaseous reaction to polyethylene is a gas to solid form , solid polymers .
The volume change is significant .
Now , remember we talked about the effect of pressure briefly that in that reaction , in the polymerization reaction , if the volume change is higher , then it is increasing pressure .
You can increase the reaction rate or we can make the reaction more feasible .
So , that is why in this case , the high pressure is used .
As I said that you have to keep your reaction temperature above of melting temperature in this case , so that the polymers have mobility , so that they can undergo further propagation reaction .
So , this reaction is done about the melting temperature , its continuous process and while talking about the chain transfer to the polymers , we gave examples of polyethylene because indeed chain transfer reaction happens to polymers in this case .
So , branches are produced .
So , this is a highly branched polymer and mostly , LDPL is low density polyethylenes are produced in this case and because this is the branched structure , it is low crystalline because the polymers cannot align each other parallely .
If they are branched , they cannot align all that time .
So , the crystalline come down and once the crystalline come down , the density of polymers also come down .
So , it is also low density .
Typical molecular for the commercial polymers are 20000 to 100000 PDI , 3 to 10 and T g of these polymers are about 120 degree of centigrade .
T m is from 105 to 110 degree centigrade and density as a set , it is in low density one more time .
Applications are in the most of this has very good strength , flexibility in packed resistance and these are good melt flow behavior .
If you have good melt flow behavior , then you can do the processing easily .
The melt processing becomes easier and in this case because we talked about application of this polymers in playing .
So , blow molding , basically the molding is done by blowing higher through a molten polymers , so that thin flames that can be done easily if you have a good melt flow behavior and polyethylene ’ s are used mostly as films for packaging materials , for house hold and agricultural construction application .
For example , whatever we commonly talked about , say polyethenes , these bags , pouches , food wraps or cloth wraps and all these things , they are made up of polyethylene .
The other examples now in this slide and the coming few slide where we are talking about other polymers , I will just mention few examples .
Now , there are 100 of other examples , other applications , these polymers are applied .
So , for this class , it is not possible to cover all the examples .
I will try to give the most common application of these polymers , but this and for this and for the coming polymers and there are trade names , where you by it this name , these polymers get sold in the market .
Again there are companies sell these polymers in different trade names and this is not expressively .
This is a very few of trade names covered in this slide .
Polystyrene , generally this is synthesized by continuous solution process .
Some cases where you need polystyrene beads and if you are giving the suspension polymers , some cross linker vinyl benzene type compound , then you can actually make cross linked bib , polystyrene bead by suspension polymerization .
The linear polymerization , typically useful commercial applications have molecular weight , it is 50000 to 150000 , PDI 2 to 4 and T g is around 85 degree centigrade and it is very rigid polymers because backbones is having aromatic structures .
If it is the chain is not difficult to rotate , the single becomes difficult .
So , it is rigid plastics .
So , it cannot come off .
So , it cannot crystallize .
If you want to crystallize polymer , then you have to align them next to each other parallely .
If you have rigid backbone , then it is very difficult because that is why its polystyrene is a completely amorphous polymer .
It has good strength and dimensional stability .
It has only elongation from 1 to 3 percent .
It has very good resistance to aqueous basis and acids , but there is some problem , disadvantage in polystyrene structure too because it is an aromatic structure .
It has poor weatheribility , it absorbs UV light and becomes yellow and it is soluble in hydrocarbon solvents .
So , its resistance to hydrocarbon solvent is poor .
So , often polystyrene is used with these stabilizers , UV stabilizer and also as a component or as a blend with other polymers or a co - polymer , with other monomers .
For example , in the beginning , we talked about butylenes styrene rubber lower or in the butylenes styrene rubber as such this is the example of co polymer , very common applications of polystyrene .
This is audiotape cassettes , office fixtures , tumbles and in medical because this styrene has an aromatic backbone .
This is stable on a .
So , if you want is medical equipment that typically sterilize by high energy radiation by like gamma rays , so these polymer polystyrene is in use .
Medical applications like pipettes , petry dishes and medical containers and so on .
Lot of applications of polystyrene goes as FOAM .
Foam of polymer polystyrene is found by impregnating and blowing agents , and we have seen yourself many applications of polystyrene founds like disposable drinking cups , the cushions , cushioned packaging and thermal insulator and sometimes , these cushions packaging like your labeled reagent bottles comes with some packing outside or some boxes made up of polyester in foams .
They are also used for thermal insulations .
If they were ever the unit to protect the brittle material inside like a cartoon , fast food , trays .
These are the cheep polymers .
So , you can use this for very common applications and cross linked PS beads which can by for the suspension polymer , they can be used for chromatographic materials .
In a chromatographic poly , these polystyrene columns are made by these , this cross linked polystyrene beads .
So , polystyrenes have also some high end applications .
In that sense , from the trade names by which polystyrene is sold is mentioned here Styrofoam , cellofoam , dytene and so on .
These are very few lists of the trade names we are talking about .
Next , we talk about the vinyl families and most important polymer in the vinyl family is poly vinyl chloride as generally synthesized by suspension polymerization batch process .
It has low crystallinelity ; it has T g around 81 degrees centigrade to 80 degree centigrade .
Now , when process this polymer at high temperature is actually evolved or produced hcl and that is very detrimental for several applications .
So , almost every applications of poly vinyl alcohol , one need to add degrees , stabilize metal oxide , fatty acids salt to basically minimize the hcl production .
Otherwise there is no practical application of PVC of polyvinyl chloride also , though it has a rigid back bone .
It has rigid plastics and also it finds several applications and there are lots of applications and in most of the applications are PVC plasticized .
PVC plasticized means it by adding some additives which are called as plasticized T g is brought down .
So , at room temperature , at the main temperature with PVC becomes flexible and the applications of flexible PVC are lot .
All the pipes , most of the pipes you see in the home or other applications are made of PVC , their applications vinyl sliding like window frames , rain gutters .
They are also used in packaging material as like bottles , box - lids and they are also used in wire and cable insulations for electrical valve and they are also used in some of other uses of surgical and protective gloves .
Some trade names are mentioned here .
Other families of vinyl members will not be discussed .
I will not discuss in detail , but these are also important vinyl polymers like vinyl acetate .
Vinyl acetate utilized to vinyl alcohol to make poly vinyl alcohols .
Polyvinyl alcohols are not produced from poly vinyl alcohol because vinyl alcohol does not exist in that .
So , poly vinyl alcohols are produced from the hydrolysis of poly vinyl acetates .
The other important polymers in this family is poly chloride .
The structure is mentioned in the bottom .
So , move to the next set of polymers is acrylic families and the most important is poly methyl methaculate .
That actually covers most of the volume of acrylic polymers and the poly methyl PM is actually synthesized by solution suspension or by emulsion polymerization .
It is of as you can see the structure that it is having the bulky side group .
So , it is very difficult to align the chains .
These are difficult to align .
So , they are perfectly , they are completely amorphous nor crystality .
They are Tg weather 105 degree centigrade .
They are very low refracting index which makes them exceptional having optical clarity because no aromatic group containing , so they have good weatheribility .
They have good strength and some of the applications are in rods , safety glasses , indoor and outer lightings and optical fibres .
They are effectively slow .
So , they are used in optical fibres for light transmission , eye goggles and cd .
The cheap cd ’ s are manufactured by compact divisional .
Though they are very , they are brittle .
Some of the trade names are shown here .
The other acrylitic families are poly methyl acrylitic acids , polyacrolomite poly acrylic acid and poly acronitral .
They also have produced commercially and find several applications and some other monomers which are also used or polymerized by radical chain .
Polymerization is slight like vinyl carbozole and in vinyl phirilidin phirilidone .
So , they are also used by the monomers which are also polymerized by radical polymerization .
So , with this , what we come to the end of this module on radical polymerization .
Now , what we will do in next 5 - 10 minutes is just to give the summary or recollect your memory , basically the most important points of the radical chain polymerization which we discussed in that 5 - 6 - 7 class lectures .
So , radical chain polymerization as we can see from our discussion that radical chain polymerizations are comparatively easiest to carry out in respect or in comparison to the step - growth polymerization ; provided you take care of the solvent , if you are using a solvent and any impurity which can terminate the radicals or any impurities which can act as a chain transfer agent .
So , if you can minimize these impurities , the chain transfer agent or any vital which actually kills the radicals , then you can have this radical polymerization process done easily .
Now , as you have seen we discussed the radical polymerization is done mostly for the double bond containing monomers , but not all the monomers which contain the double bond can be polymerized radically , and that depends on both the thermo dynamic and kinetic factor .
Thermeric factor we discussed two lectures back that if polymerizability of a monomer in radical chain , polymerization is mainly governed by the enthalpy value , deluge value , not deluge value , and the deluge value , it depends on whether the monomer is stabilized , whether it is electronically or hypercongication or resonance .
If it is stabilized , then the deluge value comes down .
If the polymer produced from this molecule is strained , highly strained , then also deluge value comes down .
So , we showed the examples of alpha methyl styrene or 1 1 1 2 or 1 1 2 di substrate monomers like a mallian hydrie , where these radical polymerization becomes difficult and that is all any factor , kinetic factor also plays if the resulting radicals cannot approach each other , radicals produced or propagating radicals cannot approach a monomer .
For example , in case of 1 2 di substitute reaction , then the polymerization becomes difficult .
The hydrie initiator you should choose such a way that the reactions happened in the model rate , so that the temperature which you are planning to reaction or rather you choose your polymerization reaction temperature such a way that the half life of your initiator is somewhat between , say your reaction time frame .
It should be too low .
So , the reaction is too fast or it should not be too slow .
That reaction is very slow and we have talked about these equations several times and the rate of polymerization and the kinetic chain length which is related to the molecular weight or number of decreases the polymerization .
In both cases , if you increase the volume molecular concentration of the monomer , the molecules weight as well as the rate of the polymerization increases , but when we try to do that , while that by carrying out the reaction is the bulk condition where you get a maximum concentration of the monomer .
The other complication arises like increasing a viscosity or lot of heat generation .
So , it is not always possible to increase the monomer concentration .
If you want to increase the reaction rate by increasing temperature , we have found out that it does increase the reaction rate in most cases , but in the simultaneous , it also decreases the molecular weight .
If you have the chain transfer reagents are present , chain transfer reaction actually limit the molecular built and more the amount of chain transformation , lower is the molecular weight and we have seen that .
You can actually take advantage if you can do this chain transfer or chain termination by reversible way , where you can utilize this reversible chain transfer termination reaction and carryout leaving reaction and carryout a leaving radical polymerization , where your poly dispersity index is much lower compared to the normal polymer radical .
Polymerization has also the polymers remain leaving at the end of the polymers .
So , we can utilize this by making block co - polymers by design of the second monomer at the end of the reaction and also , we talked about the different polymerization process like bulk suspension , emulsion , dispersion solution , different types of processes and the advantages and disadvantages of all these processes and at the beginning of your requirement , you should choose the polymerization process which suit you the most and at the end , we discussed few examples of the commercial polymers which is synthesized using this radical chain polymerization technique .
So , with this , we conclude our module on radical chain polymerization and what we will do , what we will start in the next lecture is ionic polymerization .
Why ? Basically , in state of radical , this chain polymerization will be initiated by ionic species whether it is an ion cationic or an anionic species .
So , with this , we will end this lecture today and will begin our discussion on ionic chain polymerization in the next class , next lecture .
Today we will be talking about the role of effector molecules in the kinetics of enzyme catalyzed reactions .
You will recall that so far we have seen the role substrate molecules play to influence the rate of an enzymatic reaction .
They bind with the enzyme and have dynamic complexes that ultimately break down to form the product .
Now this complex , enzyme substrate complex formation can be effected by a number of other external molecules which are not really directly the players in the enzyme reactions .
That means neither they are substrate may or may not be products and such molecules are called effector molecules .
Those molecules whose presence in a reaction mixture influences the rate of reaction , if it is in increasing the rate of reaction we call them as activators if it is decreasing the reaction rate , we call them inhibitors .
The role of these molecules is very important in the kinetics of enzyme catalyzed reactions for certain reasons .
One is that they give you a picture on the reaction rate in the presence of those molecules .
You can regulate the reaction rate to an enhanced value or to a decreased value in the presence of those molecules .
In fact in the living cells also these molecules provide a regulatory device to control the rate of reaction .
We will see when we go on subsequently how many of the molecules control the rate of reaction by inhibiting or activating a particular enzyme in the beginning of a metabolic pathway .
In addition to that , the understanding of the enzyme inhibitors or activators gives us very precise information on the specificity .
Most of the information on the architecture of the active sites , which are the functional groups that are present on the active sites or the mechanism of the specificity , has resulted from the understanding of the interaction of inhibitor molecules or activator molecules in the enzyme catalyzed reactions .
Particularly in the case of multisubstrate reactions which we will be dealing subsequently where more than one substrate molecule takes part in the enzyme catalyzed reaction their kinetic mechanism is also understood by the role of certain external effector molecules .
That is another major advantage .
So these are the issues that provide us a very important understanding towards the role of effector molecules .
But even on the practical aspect probably from the industrial aspect also effector molecules are very important because in large number of drugs and the preservatives that are used commercially they basically work on the principle of modulating the enzyme reaction rate .
We are aware of many of the sulphur drugs .
In fact all the sulphur drugs are basically inhibitors of one or the other enzyme operating in the living system .
The only care that is taken in designing a drug is that the particular molecule which acts as an inhibitor for a particular toxic substance or let us say for an infection should not be toxic to the human beings .
Otherwise it cannot be used as a drug .
Most of the materials that we use , whether they are sulphur drugs or antibiotics , they are inhibitors or activators of certain enzymes .
So from that point of view , understanding their interaction is quite important .
Activators are molecules , as name suggest , that enhance the rate of enzyme catalyzed reactions .
Some of the activator molecules may be absolutely essential for a given enzyme reaction .
Some may not be so .
They may only provide stability to enzyme substrate complex .
Therefore the nature of activator molecules might differ from case to case .
Typical examples of some of the activators are for example in the case of alpha amylase , calcium ions act as activators which is known to stabilize the enzyme substrate complex .
In the absence of calcium ions , the enzyme substrate complex is not very stable or the dissociation constant of enzyme substrate complex is relatively high and therefore the rate of reaction will be very , very slow .
Similarly in the case of most of the kinases , hexokinase , a typical example of the very first reaction in glycolysis , magnesium ions are absolutely required .
That is another example of an absolute requirement of an activator .
In the absence of magnesium ions the enzyme will not be functionally catalytically active and therefore these activators function by participating or facilitating in either enzyme substrate binding or in stabilizing the enzyme substrate complex .
The difference between cofactors and activators is a cofactor will have to participate in the catalytic mechanism .
Take for example a cofactor like a NAD .
It is used in the oxidation reduction reactions and in the absence of any such residue in the active site which can participate in the oxidation reduction reaction , the NAD provides a molecule which undergoes redox reaction and therefore catalyzes the reaction .
It also plays a role in substrate binding and the role of cofactor is absolutely essential .
The reaction cannot take place in the absence of cofactor whereas in the case of activator we are only enhancing the rate .
The rate may not come to zero .
It might have a very small insignificant rate in the absence of an activator and in the presence , the rate might enhance .
Mg2 + is an absolute requirement .
So it falls in the category of both actually .
It also participates in the catalytic mechanism .
True example of activators will be calcium ions which do not take part in the catalytic function but provides stability to enzyme substrate complex .
That means binding process is facilitated .
So magnesium is something on interface .
Looking at activators from the mechanistic point of view , the role of activators can be considered as binding to the enzyme molecule to give you an activated enzyme .
That means the free enzyme molecule will be inactive or has a very low activity .
When the activator molecule binds to it , the EA complex becomes an active enzyme complex .
This EA complex will bind with the substrate which is the active enzyme substrate complex .
This enzyme substrate complex can break down to the active enzyme plus product with k1 , k - 1 and k2 .
If we consider that the dissociation constant of activator binding to the enzyme is Ka , then in that case the rate of such reaction can be expressed as Vi = Vm .S Km { 1 + Ka / A } + S You ultimately end up in a rate expression in which the Km term is modified .
This can be written as Vm .
S / K ’ m + S The role of an activator works out to modify the intrinsic Km value of an enzyme and the effect on the Km value will influence the rate of the reaction .
One can also see that the modified Km value is Km ’ = Km { 1 + Ka / A } That is when A becomes very , very large the activator concentration present in the reaction is much larger in comparison to Ka .
That means when we have sufficient quantity of activator present as required , the K ’ m approaches to that of intrinsic Km or K ’ m / Km = 1 .
Also when the activator is zero or when there is no activator present , the enzyme reaction will not take place because modified Km value will be too large .
There will be no effective binding taking place and that means the secondary step will be ruled out .
Therefore the activator molecules can influence the reaction rate in an enzyme catalyzed process by this simple way to modify the Km value .
The second category of effector molecules that we noted was inhibitors .
As the name suggests , these are those molecules which decrease the rate of an enzyme catalyzed reactions when present in the reaction mixture .
They form complexes with enzyme molecule , enzyme substrate molecule , both or one of them .
They form dynamic complexes with the enzyme and enzyme substrate complexes and thereby influence the rate of reaction .
The inhibition patterns or inhibitors can be classified into two main classes .
One is irreversible inhibitors , which means that the inhibitor molecule binds to the enzyme in an irreversible fashion and cannot be recovered or revoked by physical operations .
Very often when into a reaction mixture if you have added an inhibitor molecule , one can remove it by physical method say for example by dialysis or ultra filtration or any of those methods .
But irreversible inhibitors cannot be removed once added to a reaction mixture and their effect is irreversible .
That means ultimately they will tend to reduce the rate of reaction and provide a poisonous effect on the rate of reaction .
In fact some times there are also called catalytic poisons because they irreversibly poison the catalyst .
In most of the cases the effect is such that the reaction rate or catalytic function of the enzyme approaches to inactive form and thereby they cannot be used for catalytic functions .
Reversible inhibition is caused by chemical modification of one of the amino acids residues on the active site .
Most of the chemical modification reagents that are used for modification of the enzyme active sites do play a role in the irreversible inhibition .
Most of the alkylating agents will alkylate some of the amino acids residues and thereby make the enzyme inactive .
Many of the heavy metals like mercury or some of the poisonous gases also have the same action of irreversible inhibition whereby saving the person become difficult .
The role of irreversible inhibitors can be expressed as ki kin E + I EI Einac k - i The first step shows a reversible process but the process doesn ’ t stop here .
Once EI is formed it goes into an inactive first order irreversible step which inactivates the enzyme and the concentration of EI at any given time can be expressed as EI = ( E0 - EI ) .I / ki where ki is the dissociation constant for the inhibitor and then one can write the inactivation rate as Vi = Kin [ EI ] = kin E0 / 1 + ki / I Therefore if I is in excess , if the magnitude of inhibitor is in excess , such that you can consider that there is a constant , then the whole expression is a first order rate constant that is kd.E0 where kd a first order rate constant assuming that I is in excess and can be considered as constant .
Such reactions are very often noted to be poisonous in nature .
Most of the substances that are technically called poisons whether it is mercury or cyanide or nerve gas and things like that they all behave in the form of irreversible inhibitors .
Except to understand their role to evolve methods to prevent the poisoning they don ’ t have much of industrial value .
It is mostly reversible inhibitors which play a key role in most of the industrial processes .
In the second category of reversible inhibitors , the inhibitor binds to the enzyme in a reversible manner .
That means after the addition of the inhibitor to an enzyme substrate mixture one can physically remove it .
The physical methods most commonly used are ultra filtration or dialysis such that the enzyme is fully restored to its initial activity .
In the presence of inhibitor their activity will be decreased but once you remove it physically , the original activity of the enzyme is recovered .
In a sense these molecules make dynamic complexes with the enzyme which have different catalytic properties to that of the native enzyme .
They bind in different ways .
Different inhibitor molecules bind differently to the enzyme molecule or enzyme substrate complex such that the catalytic properties are altered and thereby the rate of reaction is altered .
Our total orientation to study the inhibitors will be mostly directed towards the understanding the reversible inhibition .
It is reversible inhibition which forms the major portion of the effector molecules that are of industrial , medical or biological value in the case of understanding the scientific basis of enzymatic catalysis .
There are certain general patterns which we follow in studying reversible inhibition and before we go to the individual cases I like to highlight that .
The first thing that we must look at is the pattern of binding of inhibitor to enzyme or enzyme substrate complex .
How does a particular group of inhibitors bind to the enzyme molecules ?
You are proposing an operational reaction mechanism which may be slightly different than that proposed by Michaelis Menten or others earlier as we discussed and that mechanism need to be understood very clearly and that will give you a physical picture of the enzyme substrate binding .
The second thing is , on the basis of this binding process you develop a rate expression .
We always tend to compare a rate of expression with that of Michaelis Menten rate expression .
Then look at the effect of the inhibitor concentration on Km or Vm or both of the reaction .
First we have looked at the binding pattern .
Based on the binding pattern , we develop a rate expression compare it to the Michaelis Menten equation and see how the Km and Vm of the native enzyme are influenced by the presence of inhibitors .
Then we see the effect on Lineweaver Burk plot .
That is another basic expression of kinetic behavior in the case of enzyme catalyzed reaction .
If a double reciprocal plot is plotted between 1 / S and 1 / V as a function of inhibitor concentration how does this represent ?
Fifthly another important pattern is for each class of inhibition , there is degree of inhibition .
That means we define a term degree of inhibition called i which is nothing but v0 - vi / v0 .
If v0 is the rate of uninhibited reaction , classically Michaelis Menten kinetics , and vi is the rate expression for inhibited reaction , the degree of inhibition that is produced by the presence of inhibitor is obtained even from a theoretical rate expression .
You can work out an expression for degree of inhibition and that will have a characteristic pattern which can distinguish a particular type of a reversible inhibition .
All other reversible inhibition studies will be based on these five approaches in general .
Probably one of the simplest and the most commonly encountered pattern of reversible inhibition is what we know as competitive inhibition .
As the name suggests , competitive inhibitor combines with the free enzyme on the same site which is the substrate binding site and therefore the inhibitor competes for the binding site with the substrate .
Usually both inhibitor and substrate molecules are mutually exclusive and compete with each other .
The inhibitor binding site on the enzyme molecule and substrate binding site on the enzyme molecule are identical .
This should be taken in a very broad sense .
They could be on the same site where the substrate binds or even they could be on a site in proximity of that or in such a way that the binding of the substrate is influenced .
It is not always necessary that the binding site has to be exactly the same as that of substrate .
The purpose is that the presence of inhibitor makes the binding of the substrate difficult in a competitive mode .
That means the proximity may be such that the inhibitor molecule has such a confirmation that the original binding site is disturbed and substrate binding is not feasible or alternatively after binding of the inhibitor molecule the substrate binding site might be modified in such a way that substrate binding is not feasible .
All those cases , variety of cases will come under the category of competitive inhibition and the purpose is that the presence of inhibitor must reduce because reversible inhibition depends on the concentrations of the two species , inhibitor and substrate and they will affect the binding mechanism .
A very typical example and probably the most easily understood example is of oxidation of succinic acid to fumaric acid .
SDH CH2 - COOH H - C - COOH + FAD + FADH2 CH2 - COOH HOOC - C - H This enzyme is succinic dehydrogenase , SDH .
This is inhibited by a molecule closely resembling the substrate , malonic acid which has two carboxyl groups but only one methyl group , unlike succinic acid .
It is very similar in confirmation and very often enzyme active site mistakes it for succinic acid and therefore it acts as a competitive inhibitor in the same reaction .
Another example of a competitive inhibitor is sulfanilamide which is a sulpha drug .
It acts as a competitive inhibitor for folic acid biosynthesis from para amino benzoic acid .
The amino group on the aromatic ring is identical in both the molecules .
This is sulfanilamide and this is para amino benzoic acid .
This para amino benzoic acid is the starting substrate for synthesis of folic acid .
This synthesis is inhibited by this inhibitor .
Such a synthetic reaction route although takes place in microbial systems does not take place in the human beings .
Therefore this acts as a very potent sulpha drug .
This reaction is not available in the human beings but since microbial systems are totally dependent on synthesis of folic acids it can easily inhibit the growth of microorganism and sulfanilamide is a very potent antibacterial agent in the case of human systems .
If you look for the reaction scheme or the binding pattern which is followed by competitive inhibitors we can write the first stage as enzyme substrate binding .
km k2 E + S E S E + P + I ki EI Then the same free enzyme molecule binds to the inhibitor and gives you EI .
We can consider the dissociation constant of ES as km .
When I say km I am referring to k - 1 + k2 / k1 .
It is analogous to dissociation constant .
Just for simplicity I have written here and this is k2 .
This is ki , the dissociation constant for the inhibitor .
ki = E.I / EI km = E.S / ES You can write the rate expression for such a binding mechanism and the rate expression will come out to be S S v0 / vm = = km ( 1 + I / ki ) + S k ’ m + S Now if you compare it to Michaelis Menten equation which is S / k ’ m + S .
Just like an activator molecule , here also the km gets modified to a new value 1 + I / ki and therefore as the concentration of I increases the value of km also increases and the affinity decreases for the substrate .
The modified Michaelis Menten constant in the presence of inhibitor is k ’ m = km ( 1 + I / ki ) So you notice here that the Km changes by a magnitude 1 + I / Ki but the Vm remains unchanged , Vm.S on the numerator ; there is no change in the magnitude of Vm .
Maximum reaction velocity remains the same but the km changes .
That is a very typical feature of identifying a competitive inhibitor .
If you make a double reciprocal Lineweaver - Burk plot between one upon substrate concentration verses one upon reaction velocity , 1 / S Vs 1 / V , at different inhibitor concentrations , you will notice that with increasing inhibitor concentration the value of km will undergo change .
km will tend to increase or the slope of the profile will increase without affecting the point of intersection on y - axis which is represented as 1 / Vi .
If you write the double reciprocal equation for the same thing , what we wrote earlier 1 / vo = km / Vm ( 1 + I / ki ) .1 / S + 1 / Vm If you plot 1 / S verses 1 / vo you get a series of profiles with increasing I .
The slope increases but the magnitude of 1 / Vm remains unaltered .
That is what we notice .
Another fact is if one were interested to determine the value of ki in comparison to km and Vm and the characteristic pattern of inhibition , you can use the double reciprocal plot as a basis for determining the value of ki .
If you look at the slope of reciprocal plot slope is Slope = km / Vm ( 1 + I / ki ) = km / Vm.ki.I + km / Vm If you get a secondary plot where you plot the value of slope , obtained from the primary double reciprocal plot , as a function of inhibitor concentration you will again end up in a straight line with the slope of km / Vm.ki .
km and Vm is the slope at I = 0 which is already known to us and therefore the magnitude of ki can be easily determined .
Similarly you can also plot the apparent km .
The slope also means the apparent km .
So either you can plot apparent km or you can plot slope .
It will be entirely the same thing .
Therefore one can get the magnitude of ki by plotting a secondary plot .
So to summarize the competitive inhibition , we must notice that the inhibitor molecule binds to an enzyme molecule at a site either on the same side which is ear marked for substrate molecule or at a site in proximity to it in such a way that it interferes or restricts the binding of the substrate molecule onto the enzyme site and therefore it competes for the binding process on the enzyme molecule .
There is no binding of the inhibitor molecule with the enzyme substrate molecule once the substrate molecule has bound to the enzyme , the inhibitor is ineffective .
Either inhibitor has to bind to the enzyme or the substrate has to bind to the enzyme .
That means the total enzyme concentration is distributed between inhibitor and substrate and that is one .
Second thing is the enzyme catalyzed reaction in the presence of a competitive inhibitor results in an increased km value and the Vm value is totally not affected .
Third thing is that the effect of the competitive inhibitor can be successfully overcome to a significant extent if you increase the substrate concentration to a very large value as compared to inhibitor concentration .
Because they are competing on the same side , if the concentration of substrate is much , much larger than inhibitor then the possibility of substrate molecule binding to enzyme is much more and once substrate molecule is bound the enzyme will no longer be available for inhibitor to act upon .
Finally the double reciprocal plot of 1 / S verses 1 / V at different inhibitor concentrations followed by a secondary plot of slope verses inhibitor concentration can be used to determine the magnitude of km , Vm and ki for a reaction which involves competitive inhibitor .
We will stop at this point .
Welcome back to the course on polymer chemistry and in today ' s class .
We will discuss we will basically continue our discussion having polymers in solution and the topics , we plan to cover today this lecture is now cohesive energy density and solubility parameter .
How we can use the knowledge from solubility parameter and we can estimate or predict the solubility behavior of a polymer in a solvent .
And then we will follow up our discussion with a phase separation behavior of polymer solutions .
Now , let us begin just recapping few minutes what we discussed in last class or last lecture .
Now , this is what we found we derived the Flory - Huggins equation where now this is Gibbs free energy of mixing given by two terms this term was coming from purely combinatorial entropy and this is always negative .
And so this is always favors mixing this is always gives you negative contribution towards Gibbs free energy mixing , this is always favors mixing .
And this coming from a combination of enthalpy and entropy change due to polymer solvents contacts .
And it will decide because it is always negative and it is always contribute in favor of mixing .
So , the value of this basically determines where polymer will mix or becomes soluble in a solvent or not .
And if the value becomes less than zero negative obviously mixing will happen , if it is positive and large no mixing and if it is slightly positive small I did not change from .
So , this is if it slightly positive and this is and the value is small and it depends between the completion of this two to which will decide whether the polymers will go in to solution or not .
In dilute polymer solution we had found that the excess contribution excess chemical potential , we got this relationship .
And at related temperature this term the contribution of excess chemical potential becomes 0 and the solutions become ideally .
If you look at this expression if this contributes negatively , obviously mu 1 this difference would be lower than the ideal .
That means polymer will the solution or the mixture of polymer and the solvent will be favored , if this is positive then it will be higher than the value of ideal .
So , it will be it will have effect against solution .
So , theta temperature the this becomes 0 , so the solutions become ideal solutions and polymer exist in solution with unperturbed dimensions .
Now , we will come in a next lecture what is unperturbed dimensions , but what does it mean in brief as if polymers are present as such without no interference or no interaction from the other polymer molecule or the solvent molecule , which will discuss what the meaning of unperturbed dimensions in detail in next lecture .
Obviously as I said that when theta is temperature is theta temperature value of polymer solvent interaction parameter chi becomes 0.5 .
So , the solution will be the polymer and solvent mix like ideal solution , if this is if the value of chi becomes lower than half then the coil expands polymer expands in solution , which promotes mixing .
Psi was if you recollect the this was entropy parameter now to have this term negative , for a positive entropy factor or parameter , T has to higher than the theta temperature to have mixing .
Whereas , if the entropy factor is negative than T has to be lower than the theta temperature to have mixing possible .
And the other cases , where the opposite case or the reverse case where chi polymer solvent interaction parameter is higher than 0.5 , it against mixing .
Just to give few data for polymer solvent polymer solvent system having different values of i and theta… Let us look at some data of different polymers and with different solvents as we are mentioning , for all this cases the interaction parameter value chi is less than 0.5 .
That means this is all this examples we are talking about favoring mixing so as I mentioned , if psi is positive then for mixing to happen temperature has to be higher than theta .
And examples where there are strong interaction between the solvent and the polymer , the entropy factor becomes negative .
In that case the temperature has to be lower than the theta temperature to have the mixing possible .
And these are two examples where the psi factor is negative and theta has to be lower than theta two to get the mixing possible .
Now , let us move to the one more topic on solubility which is determined cohesive energy density and solubility parameter .
Now , if you look back the Flory - Huggins expression we have two terms the first term from the combinatorial entropy , which can predict theoretically if you know the volume fractions of the polymer and the number of moles of the polymer molecules .
The second term which actually determines the polymer will get solubilized in the solvent , you need to find out the value of that .
And there are some approach some approaches from the different , different scientist made and one of the important and important contribution from this towards this is by Hildebrand , Hildebrand who basically introduced the concept of cohesive energy density… And relations to solubility parameter , and this is simple way to predict the solubility of polymer in a solvent and miscibility also can predict the miscibility the behavior of polymer polymer system .
And we also can because it as if it can determine the solubility of polymer , it can also simultaneously detect the solvent resistance behavior of the polymer .
It mainly useful for as we see it is mainly useful for non - polar solvents and non - polar amorphous polymers , it is not very useful for polar molecules and polar solvents .
It is basically a semi - empirical approach as suggested by Hildebrand following the principle like dissolves like .
This means basically as we know that like the polymers which are a similar structure or similar sort of interaction behavior with a solvent will dissolve in that solvent .
Quantitably this cohesive energy density is defined by this which is delta E v is molar energy of vaporization , it can be written by this expression also where delta H v sub v is molar energy of enthalpy of vaporization , this is molar energy of vaporization and this is molar enthalpy of vaporization v is the molar volume of the substance .
Now , as you know cohesive energy is basically , it gives idea about the interaction or the force of attraction between the similar type of molecule .
So , if the cohesive energy density is the higher than the attraction of the attraction between the similar molecules is higher .
So , as we know from our previous understanding that cohesive energy is the energy of interaction between the similar molecules .
So , higher cohesive energy density means higher attraction between the molecules .
Now , one defined the term solubility parameter which is basically square root of cohesive energy density .
So it is given by this expression and this is what we are looking for the enthalpy of mixing is given by , if you know the values of the solubility parameter then the enthalpy of mixing can be obtained by this expression .
We know the contribution from the combinatorial entropy which is always favoring mixing .
Now , this is the term will give you the enthalpy of mixing the way this expression has been proposed , it always gives the entropy the enthalpy of mixing .
Enthalpy of mixing del H m is positive or 0 , if delta 1 is equals to delta 2 the drawback of these approach is that it cannot predict any negative enthalpy of mixing , which sometimes happen if there are strong specific interaction between the polymer and the solvent .
V m is the average molar volume of the polymer and the solvent .
So , if you if you think about the Gibbs energy of mixing which is delta H minus 3 delta s .
So , obviously the lower is the value of delta h the better is the mixing and if it is negative then obviously it favors the most in this case because it is positive or 0 , then the case where delta H mixing would be 0 , it will be most favorable for mixing .
And if it is positive then the lower is the value of delta H sub m it will be it will be better for mixing .
So , as Hildebrand suggests that that compatibility between components one which is the solvent and two which is the solute the polymer in this case arises , as you have the less differences between the solubility parameter of the two components .
So , if this they are same that is the best case where delta H m would be equals to 0 .
Now , we have we have seen before that the polymer solvent interaction parameter can is actually have two component , the entropy component and enthalpy component .
It can be shown that enthalpy component is can be expressed by this expression as well , and this term entropic contribution towards the polymer solvent interaction parameter is most cases , it happens the value of 0.2 .
So , if this is close to or at least less than 0.3 then chi would be less than 0.5 , which means it will promote mixing and which means the closer this the value of delta 1 and delta 2 .
Then obviously the difference it will be nearer to 0 the chi H value would be nearer to 0 .
So , from this expression also you can predict that the polymer solvent interaction parameter will be lower than 0.5 , which means the polymer will promote or it will dissolve in the solvent you are using .
Now as I said that before that this box will for polymers of or for a non - polar solvent the non - polar amorphous polymer .
It is not valid for crystalline polymers because you know this , this expression or this approach we are talking about talks about liquid solvent and liquid polymer .
Means amorphous polymer so in if you want to dissolve a crystalline polymer then you have to also include the contribution for the enthalpy of crystallization .
So , in this case the enthalpy of crystallization is not taken in to account .
So , that is why this is this approach is not valid for crystalline polymers this is added already for amorphous polymer .
In case of polar solvent you can have specific interaction between the polymer and the solvent .
For example , it can have hydrogen bonding , it can participate in the electrostatic interaction and which we can think that if there is specific interaction like hydrogen bonding attraction between polymer , and solvent .
Then there is a possibility that there is H mixing would be negative and that as it approach the solubility parameter approach , does not predict any value any negative value of delta H mixing .
So , this is not valid for polymer long polar a polar polymer and polar solvent as usually , which is usually valid for non polar solvent and non polar and non polar amorphous and non polar solvent .
Now , how to get these delta value , the value of the solubility parameter ?
Obviously as we you can recollect this the delta can the cohesive delta is the we see square root we see the cohesive density and cohesive energy density can be found from molar energy of vaporization or molar enthalpy of vaporization .
For liquids or for solvents we can experimentally determine the molar enthalpy of vaporization and the molar volume .
So , you can get the cohesive energy density and the value for the solubility parameter as well .
But for polymers because they cannot be vaporizable vaporize or polymers are not vaporizable , you cannot experimentally get the value of solubility parameter for the polymer because they are large in size .
So , they are the value of delta the solubility parameter of polymer are typically determined indirectly and it is basically following the approach , we took delta H becomes 0 as delta 1 , delta 2 becomes same .
So , a polymers are added if talking about linear polymer then the intrinsic viscosity of that polymer is measured in several solvents , several common solvents .
And the highest or the maximum intrinsic which is the in which the solvent in which the polymer gives , we the solubility parameter of the polymer is taken as the same solubility parameter of that particular solvent .
Basically this indirectly telling that the delta 1 , delt 2 are same .
So , this give giving the maximum solubility or maximum intrinsic viscosity for that polymer if the polymers are crops linked or jelt , then we do the same experiment take the polymer and do series of put the polymer need to work in series of solvent and find out the maximum swelling ability .
If the where that interaction is maximum , the maximum swelling happens .
So , we take the solubility parameter of that particular solvent as the solubilitic parameter of the given polymer .
The value of solubility parameter of the polymers can be also indirectly obtained from group contribution method .
As you know the group contribution methsods are utilized to find out theoretically , the value for several other parameters several other properties of polymer .
And this solubility parameter can be also obtained by group contribution method , and this how it is done there particularly the solubility… This is done theoritically delta is this , F is the contribution form or the value for different groups .
If you can divide or bisects the polymer into different parts then these values for F are available in literature .
So , you can add those and this is molar volume so you can also write this as density and molecular width , F can be on F value of F so given by a small an Hoy and this looks at one example we take P M M A poly method calculate the structure of which is as you know this is the structure .
So , how many groups it has we have to count groups there 2 C H 3 groups 1 C H 2 group .
So , 1 C H 2 group 1 C O group and one motoring carbon in case of these are the groups there in this polymer , then values of these are separate these the contribution of these groups have already tabulated or theoretically find out by scientists like Small and Hoy , you have to just take those values and add up to get the this value .
And then get the solubility value the F value which has been supplied in literature for this is 303.4 .
So , this gives you 269 .
So , sum up 1609.5 , so delta would be given by multiplied the density 1.19 and by the molar mass , mass of the repeating unit .
Now , look at these values of the groups as I said that this is this gives this , basically the solubility parameter is basically the square root of the cohesive energy density .
And cohesive density energy is nothing but measure for the interaction or attractive interaction between the molecules .
If there are polar molecules , obviously the are attraction between the similar molecules become higher .
So , the contribution become higher and if the volume becomes higher theres no polar groups the volume becomes higher there is more Vander Wall forces between them which also , increases the cohesive interaction between the groups .
So , this C H 3 has higher than C H 2 than the votronic carbon atom this is the size of the group so the size increases Wander Walls force is increases so increases .
So , the value of or fluctuation for this group increases .
So , like this you can get the value for this interaction parameter for any of the polymers because the value of this are supplied by available in the literature .
Now , look at sum of the final sum of the polymers and solvent common solvent like acetone delta value 20.3 c c l 6 , this example of take few polymer like polystyrene , this is some polymer polystyrene 18.5 and bis phenyl poly carbonate its around 19.5 to 20 .
Obviously if you look at this number 19.5 and to 20 this number 19.5 to 20 , obviously look at this , this solvents .
Now , as we have seen that if the delta value of the polymer is closer to the value of solvent that of solvent liquid that of mixing the polymer will be soluble in that solvent .
So , polycarbonate will obviously become soluble in chloroform , it is 19.5 and 19.19 , 19.5 .
Obviously polycarbonate will not be soluble in methanol water or some of the non polar solvents , cyclohexene and sides carbon tetrachloride zylene and so on .
Acetone 20.3 is basically this polycarbonate becomes soil it ’ s not very good solvent for polycarbonate , but it is it is also a very non solvent either .
So , the solubility of polycarbonate is a very low , but it ’ s is not zero in acetone .
So , if basically if you know the solvents and the value of polycarbonate you can predict , you can estimate the whatever , whatever you want to know which application .
For example , if you want to use some medical devices you know you in medical devices , like cringes and some other medical component like you most cases before use they are sterilized by applying some spirit rectified spirit , which contains alcohol .
If you know the solubility parameter of that alcohol then you know what are the , you can estimate or you can basically zero down , narrow down the choices of your polymer which will not be soluble in that alcohol , which will be use wiping those or sterilizing those equipment .
So , you can basically , reduce your number experiment which can , which you can already your choice of polymer by a prior knowledge of solubility parameter , and some value of solubility solvent and polymer .
Some cases this rubber gaskets are used for sealant in may be in aircraft applications , where a ceiling is very important .
Now , obviously they come in case of car also they clients are very important .
So , how they come in the contact of the petroleum vapours , or they come in contact with liquid fuel .
Now , if those rubbers or the sealants , rubbers actually gets solvents then there would be leakage or there in that sealing method .
So , you do not want your material rubber material to swell in that particular gasoline or liquid fuels .
So , you choose a polymer which would be non soluble polymer in that environment .
So , if you have prior knowledge of your solubility parameter of the polymer and solvent then you can narrow down the polymers , before you go the exact trail .
If you look at the polis polystyrene obviously polystyrene will not soluble in water and methanol , but it polystyrene almost soluble in most of this solvents .
So , it actually gives you idea it doesnot gives you exact sort of solubility behavior , but it this gives you guidelines or help you to understand , what is the solubility you know bring the solubility of the polymer in a solvent .
Now let us move to the next topic where we talk about polymer phase separation behavior of polymer solution .
And again going back to the Flory - Huggins expression Flory - Huggins equation , this is Gibbs energy of mixing .
Now , if you want to convert it Gibbs energy mixing per segment or per unit then we will divide by the number of segments total number segments or number of lattice sign n 1 is for the solvent , and this is for the polymer .
So , you divide that and get this as another expression for the poly habrid expression , where this Gibbs free energy of mixing takes place in terms of first segment of the polymer molecule .
Now , this gives the behavior of the or the how the Gibbs energy of mixing per segment varies with , say one of the say compositions in this pie 2 , pie 1 can be converted into pie , pie 2 easily see if you plot say del g mixing .
If you plot del g mixing first segment if you can get from this expression of what we just saw in this case , from this expression we will tell you it will give two general type of variation of this p and g with in this case say pie 2 , of the polymer .
Now , let us consider this case , the temperature is T 5 , now in this case if you take any point say I will take at this point .
Now , if this has to spontaneously phase separate to any of the other two compositions , say this composition and this composition two point .
So , I consider a solution which corresponds to this particular pie 2 .
Now , if that has to spontaneously phase separate in to in to two other composition obviously one has to be polymer rich and this one and other has to be solvent rich left hand side .
Pie 2 comes down you can take any two point , now if that process of phase sep spontaneous phase separation happen the delta g mixing of that process would be given by the value of this , which is the distance between the interaction point of the tie line , this is tie line .
Now , the tie line is the line straight line connecting two points in that curve and this line , which is a vertical line parallel to the y axis .
Now , this the value of this gives you the Gibbs free energy mixing I am telling again the value of this gives you the Gibbs free energy of mixing for the process of separating a composition corresponding to this to , to composition corresponding to this and this now this value , if you can see any of this points is positive .
Which means that this process of spontaneous phase separation is thermodynamically not visible , which also means that each point or each solution in this line corresponds different pie 2 , they are all stable .
That means the polymer and the solvent is soluble across compositions .
So , If you take polymer and dissolve in the soluble at in the solvent it will be soluble for that particular temperature in this case T 5 for any at any composition , it will not face separate to any two composition I mean polymer rich and solvent rich , phases as that is thermodynamically not feasible .
Now , consider another temperature T 1 you get this type of this is another general type curve .
Now , the region this side below this point say I if I write c and it is a point d below left hand side c and above d is similar to this expression .
So , all the composition will be stable , so you will get soluble polymer will get solubilized in the solvent in this range and in this range , exactly like this .
Now , look at another composition here any point here between this and this point any point in this curve , this is the tie line .
So , if this has to phase separate this , this solution having polymer mole fraction of this value if that has two phase separate two , two composition having polymer mole fraction correspondence to this and this , the Gibbs mixing would be given by this value and that is negative .
So , which means that between this point and this point between this point and this point any composition , which immediately phase separate and come to this two points .
So , if you have any solution having pie 2 value in this region , immediately they will phase separate and form two equilibrium solution , one is polymer rich , one is solvent rich .
Now , look at point here any point between this two line this point and this point and this point and this point .
So , this is E f so any point between c and e and f and d now , if at if this has to phase separate to any of the slight changes in to slight changes in the composition .
Say this point in this point it will be similar to this curve , similarly same in this case , but if this has to phase separate if I consider this point which has this value of pie 2 , if this has to separate phase separate into two phases having composition between this point and this point .
Then obviously delta g mixing positive so that mean unfavourable , but if this composition is phase separate into a point here and here , the delta g be negative .
So , it will spontaneously phase separate , see if this any point in this region any composition any solution would be stable , for small change in composition , but it is not stable for a large changes composition beyond this , this point .
So , this is region of metastable region where the composition are stable only for slight change in composition .
So , this is meta stable region so these regions are metastable c to e and f to d and any composition between e to f is completely unstable , which will immediately phase separate into c and d .
And any composition between this point and c and d to n would be stable , there will be clear solution .
This is the inflection point this is the inflection point .
Now , if I change some other temperatures the solution will , you can draw some other lines .
And then join these points , this points to get a bell safe curve which I just come in a minute .
Now , let ’ s talk little more about this two points and this two points c d and e f .
Now , delta g mix I can write delta v 1 plus x 1 x 2 the mole fraction delta 1 , 2 delta mu i is mu i minus mu 1 , it can be write little as g is a intrinsic quantity .
So , I can write x 2 delta mu 1 plus x 2 delta mu 2 .
So , if you plot delta m versus x 2 you get the slope as delta mu 2 minus delta mu 1 and the intercept will be at x regard to 0 , delta mu 1 and at x 2 is equal to 1 we will get delta mu two till the intercepts , intercept at x 2 is equal to 0 and x 2 is equal to 1 .
And if I want to do it for delta G m star which is for segment and pie 2 , we can easily imagine that the slope would be slope at any point of that curve will be mu 1 .
And the intercept at pie 2 0 would be delta mu 1 , which is mu 1 minus mu 0 that is the intercept at pie 2 is equal to 1 of the delta mu to x , this is a simple mathematic you can find out that .
So , what means that if you plot these delta G m versus pie 2 then the slope will be given by this and the intercept would be given by this values .
Now , if you look at this two point the tangent for those two point would meet at the same points , which means they have they must have a common tangent .
So , these two point must have a common tangent so the and has the slope is given by this , which will also mean that mu 1 for the solvent at point c will be equals to mu 1 at d mu 2 at point c would be equals to mu 2 at d this two point will have same slope and have a common tangent .
If the common tangent in the slopes will be same and from the slope , we have already seen you can write that mu 1 c equals to mu d .
So , chemical potential of the solvent in this point is same as this point so as the chemical potential of the polymer in this point .
And this means that c and d are two equilibrium , equilibrium composition and we name this as binodal , binodal compositions or binodal points .
Now , this is between c and d you can clearly see that c and d are the binodal points… where is 0 between c c and e d and f the slope is changing in positive way so d pie 2 is greater than 0 .
And between e and f this is the change of slope , sorry this is slope and this is the rate of change of slope this change of is coming in positive direction here , and negative direction here .
And in the inflection point which is e and f , inflection point e and f would be 0 , these two points which are inflection points is called spinodal points .
Spinodal points or spinodal cum composition , basically it is the boundary between spinodal points , spinodal composition this is the boundary between a meta stable and a unstable composition .
The inflection point is the boundary between the mate stable and the unstable compositions and this gives why this expression .
Now , I was telling little earlier that now you can draw similar lines like let me try and then join this spinodal points .
And also join the you can join this spinodal points and you can also join the inflection points to get something like this .
I have already drawn so you can just see form here , so you can get a curve like this are the locus of the bi nodal points at different temperature , at different temperature you have different bi nodal points you have temperature these , you have temperature these like this at one point they will merge .
Similarly , this line is the loci for locus for the spinodal points , spinodal points these are the different points for the different temperature .
And at some points they converge so this point this is critical points is given by critical points is given by convergence of the points of common tangency and inflection points .
Common tangency points are the spinodal points and inflection sorry common tangency points or binodal points and inflection points are spinodal points .
So , by converging you get T c , and so you can write at that point at T c both are zero , this way you can get this .
I hope you got it this are this line this solid line is this you join different binodal points obtains in different .
So , if one temperature you got binodal points here and here another points you got binodal points here and here , the another one here and here you have just joined them and got a binodal curve .
Similarly , this temperature you have spinodal points like here and here , this temperature you have here and here similarly , hear you can join them and get a spinodal curve .
And this is the point they converge .
So , what about this regions then ?
Any composition above this curve this solid curves will be completely soluble they will have single phase .
So , any point in this diagram will be having single , single phase any point with in these .
So , basically this region will be completely insoluble they face separate out .
And any region any point here would be meta stable one so in single curve , single diagram you can get complete phase diagram , it basically gives you the phase diagram of that polymer in that solvent .
So , basically you are plotting a different temperature , the composition of the solution so at any point in this region , you get a single phase which is polymer soluble in the solvent .
Any point this is temperature and this composition you get two phase polymer and in this case you get meta stable solution which will be stable to a small fluctuation in the composition , but not in the large fluctuation .
So , this basically gives you the phase you are getting phase diagram of a polymer in a solvent form that original Flory - Huggins equation , this point you call U C S T upper critical solution temperature , so above this temperature the polymer is soluble in that solvent at any composition .
Below this temperature the polymer is the only soluble in that solvent in this composition left hand of this point and in this composition , but above this temperature the polymer is soluble in the solvent at any composition , that is called upper critical solution temperature .
And you can get the reverse also and in that case this point called L C S T is called lower critical solution .
So , basically below this temperature everything is soluble , in a polymer soluble at every composition so if I take that Flory - Huggins expression this one and Flory - Huggins expression this one… And write the conditions from for spinodal id equal to 0 , you get the spinodal points like 1 1 minus pie 2 plus .
And for the critical this was the critical point you get , again if you do this you have the expression for delta G m and star for if you do this you will get pie 2 c for the critical .
And form these two you can write the critical these are just pure mathematics form you are getting these expression from Flory Huggins expression which we called earlier for the per segment Gibbs free energy per segment .
So , you can get this expression what you will do is just .
In the next lecture we will take this and just complete the discussion of our phase separation of polymer solution .
And then we will look in to it that how the molecular weight or the size of the polymer determine the solubility of polymer , and which can utilize to fraction fractionate the polymer of different molecular weight .
We will just start form this in next lecture .
Today we shall discuss about the effect of immobilization on functional properties of the enzyme molecules .
We have seen a number of immobilization methods that we have discussed in previous classes .
We see that in most cases the enzyme undergoes loss of activity during immobilization .
In fact no method can ensure that you can recover the enzyme in hundred percent yield .
The yield can vary depending on the method of immobilization , depending on the carrier and the stability of the enzyme itself with respect to the conditions of immobilization .
This loss of enzyme activity could be real or could be apparent .
By real I mean that you cannot recover , after the immobilization , the original enzyme activity by physical interventions .
On the other hand the apparent loss refers to the reduced enzyme activity that you are measuring but by certain physical interventions the original activity can be restored .
It is not a permanent loss of activity but due to certain physical forces which make a interplay with the catalytic function , the enzyme activity seems apparently to have been lost .
The reasons for the two types of losses , the real and apparent , could be attributed to one or more of the following four factors that are listed here .
The first and foremost factor is the change in the enzyme conformation itself .
When the soluble enzyme is immobilized on to a matrix the interaction between the matrix and the enzyme amino acids might lead to certain conformational changes possibly due to the result of involvement of some of the amino acids residues in the immobilization process .
So therefore all the intermolecular forces that attribute to the enzyme conformation are altered .
Very often it has been noticed that a very common feature is that upon immobilization an enzyme may undergo some kind of unfolding ; some kind of a stretching .
There are no parameters which can be simply measured .
A detailed analysis or detailed study on the conformation , just like what we do as for identification of the globular structure the tertiary structure of the enzyme , one can study .
But other wise a quick quantitative measure of the conformational loss is only through measurement of enzyme activity .
For example here you see that this is a typical soluble enzyme shown here .
It has been immobilized on to a solid matrix by some bonds ; it could be an electrostatic bond ; it could be a metal salt linkage ; it could be covalent bond or it could also be as an entrapment within a gel .
Entrapment within a gel fortunately does not involve the amino acids of the enzyme protein and therefore the chances of any conformational change during gel entrapment are minimum .
Then during immobilization , the enzyme may under go some conformational changes .
Just a hypothetical change I have shown here .
It could be in any shape .
It could be simply unfolding ; it could be some kind of stretching and it may lead to a totally inactive enzyme preparation or a reduced activity of an enzyme preparation .
Reduced activity means that the protein content will be reduced .
The specific activity of the enzyme that means the enzyme activity in terms of international units per milligram of protein might get reduced .
There have been certain exceptions .
I am saying exceptions which are rare examples where the enzyme activity after the immobilization has also been analyzed .
If the conformational changes are more favorable to the factors that are responsible for reduction in activation energy either by strain or any other mechanism that we discussed earlier by entropic or enthalpic changes which reduce the energy of activation for the enzyme catalyzed reaction , it might also lead to favorable conformational change .
But those examples are indeed rare and not very common examples .
Then the second factor which is responsible for loss of enzyme activity is steric hindrance .
In many cases the immobilization process might involve the reduction in the access of the substrate molecule to the enzyme active site .
You have achieved a good binding but the enzyme active sites are hindered from access to the substrate molecule .
A typical case is shown here .
In this case , the enzyme has been immobilized on sites which are in very great proximity to the active site and therefore the participation or the involvement of the substrate with the active sites is reduced and that also results in reduced enzyme activity .
However such a enzyme activity can be recovered or this phenomena can be reduced if you can use a proper choice of the method for immobilization .
In some of the cases the steric hindrances can be minimized by introduction of the spacer arm .
For example if you are going to immobilize this enzyme you can introduce a kind of a hydrocarbon chain before it is really coupled to the enzyme molecule .
That means between the binding sites introduction of a spacer arm which is usually a hydrocarbon chain and which can make the binding more flexible and there by the steric hindrances can be reduced .
But in a particular method of immobilization the steric hindrance results in a definite loss of enzyme activity which is a real loss and cannot be recovered by physical methods .
For example if you have covalently bound an enzyme i.e. , by covalent bond depending on the method of binding if you have not involved a spacer arm the loss will remain there .
But you cannot recover that .
Unless you modify enzyme immobilization procedure whereby a spacer arm is introduced then you can reduce the steric hindrance .
The method can be modified to result in reduced loss as a result of steric hindrance .
But once a preparation has been made with a definite amount of steric hindrance , the loss is real .
The third factor which contributes to loss of enzyme activity is partitioning effect .
We must consider immobilized enzymes in the light of a shift from homogenous catalysis to heterogeneous catalysis .
Instead of looking at the catalytic reaction in a homogenous phase where the catalyst is dissolved in the same medium as the reactant here the catalyst has a different phase - solid phase and the substrate is in the liquid phase .
You lead into a heterogeneous catalysis and the various species that are involved in the reaction , it could be a substrate ; it could be inhibitor ; it could be simple hydrogen ions which contribute to the pH ; they might get partitioned in the two phases depending on the chemical nature of the bulk and the carrier particles and this partition effect can also lead to an apparent loss of enzyme activity in a particular situation .
The fourth is the diffusional limitations .
A result of incorporation of a solid particle in a reaction mixture and particularly we consider a porous solid particle where most of the enzyme has been immobilized on the interior of the particle .
When a solid particle is immersed into a liquid phase there is also bound to be a stationary film of liquid around the particle .
This film thickness can vary depending on the physical properties of the substrate solution ; for example viscosity or density .
They may control the film thickness and these might call also a diffusional constraint particularly with respect to transport of the substrate from the bulk to the site of enzyme catalyzed reaction .
The two effects the partitioning effect and the mass transfer of the diffusional effect can be visualized here If you notice here for example in the right hand side diagram we have assumed a hypothetical carrier preparation which is poly anionic in nature .
That means it is highly negatively charged and an enzyme molecule is entrapped or located in the midst of negative charges .
Consider the situation in the bulk .
The total charge inside the carrier particle or around enzyme where the catalysis is going to take place will be different than in the bulk .
If in case the substrate also happens to be a charged molecule , so there will be some partitioning effects of the substrate between the bulk and so the real substrate concentration what we are considering in the bulk phase will not be same at the site of the enzyme reactions .
I will come to that .
I am just describing the right hand side one .
There could be very clear cut partitioning effects with respect to hydrogen ions because they are positively charged and a poly ionic carrier will definitely have preference for hydrogen ions .
Therefore the hydrogen ion concentration inside the carrier will be greater than the bulk .
Similarly if the substrate is also positively charged you are going to have higher substrate concentration in the carrier or at the site of enzyme rather than the bulk or it could be the other way .
If suppose the substrate is also negatively charged the reverse might happen .
That means the bulk concentration vary more than at the site of the reaction .
That might lead to the apparent effect on the enzyme activity .
On the left hand side I have shown the diffusional effects .
You see the particles shown here ; let us say a kind of a spherical particle not perfectly sphere but something which can be assumed to be spherical and with a network of pores within the particle and the enzyme is located while on the surface as well as on the bulk of the enzyme .
In fact a very large percentage , more than ninety percent of the enzyme will be distributed on the porous network within the particle .
Only very small fraction will be on the surface and for the reaction to take place the substrate has to diffuse from the bulk to the site of the enzyme reaction .
Here you notice that in the case of the immobilize enzyme unlike a soluble enzyme what we are conventionally used to where the enzyme is in direct proximity with the substrate and can interact and reaction can take place without any resistance other than the chemical reaction , the biochemical reaction .
Here in addition to biochemical reaction you have another limitation .
That means the bulk substrate has to diffuse through the stationary film which is on the surface of the particle .
This surface , they have a thickness delta on the basis of the physical properties of the substrate molecule and the carrier particle .
The thickness of the stationary film can be reduced by changing the flow properties in the reactor stream and as we will see further that the effect of thickness of the stationary film can be reduced if you increase the linear field velocity in a continuous reactor or increase agitation speed in a stirred vessel in a stirred reactor .
So you can reduce it .
But any way it has to transfer from the bulk phase to the stationary phase and their might be some concentration gradient in the substrate .
From the surface , the substrate has to move to the enzyme active site and the enzyme is distributed all over the particle .
Depending on the particle thickness , let us say diameter of the particle is dp the substrate might be able to reach only up to a part of the carrier .
Let us say it reaches up to here .
The substrate value comes down to zero .
This means that a fraction of the total enzyme available in the immobilize preparation is not able to interact with the substrate because of diffusion limitations .
This will depend on the relative rate of diffusion vis - à - vis , the rate of biochemical catalysis .
The slower rate will dominate the effect .
If suppose the biochemical reaction rate is very fast compared to rate of diffusion of the substrate into the carrier particle , it might happen that soon after the surface of the catalyst particle the substrate concentration might drop to a very small level or even to zero depending on the rate of diffusion which is smaller than that .
Or on the other hand if the biochemical reaction rate is very , very slow compared to diffusion or diffusion is very fast you might have a reasonable concentration of substrate even at the centre of the particle and therefore the apparent loss of enzyme activity may not be serious .
So in case of enzyme reactions where enzymes have a very high activity or in other words a few are able to make a preparation which has a very high enzyme loading that means the amount of enzymes in terms of international units per gram of the carrier particle if that can be increased to a significant level , then the system can be operated which is under diffusion limitations .
If you are able to prepare an immobilize enzyme preparation with a very high enzyme loading that means the catalytic rate is very high .
Enzyme loading high means the catalytic rate will be very high because the enzyme activity in terms of international units , the reaction rate per unit weight of the carrier , if that is very high compared to the rate of diffusion then the whole system can be conceived to be totally diffusion limited .
The biochemical reaction kinetics will not have a major role to play and the whole thing will be controlled by the physical diffusion .
I have told you two kinds of effect of diffusion .
One is the external film diffusion .
The other is the diffusional limitations caused by the boundary layer film , inert film on the boundary as external film diffusion .
On the other hand , the diffusional process within the pores of the particle or internal pore diffusion .
The two types of diffusion , we will subsequently see their quantitative analysis in relation to the biochemical reaction but we shall understand that these two processes will put you four additional resistances over and above the biochemical reaction .
One is the transport of substrate from the surface to the enzyme active site and then reverse will be transport of product .
Ultimately for all practical purposes our measurements or monitoring will be in the bulk .
So the product has to also transport and it might also undergo a kind of a gradient .
Just to illustrate a little more detail on the transport behavior consider a typical spherical particle with an external film shown here .
This is substrate concentration .
“a ” is shown as substrate concentration at the bulk phase , that means at the entry of the boundary layer .
There will be a gradient of substrate in the boundary layer .
This gradient will depend on the thickness of the boundary layer and you can minimize this by increasing a very high agitation speed in the stirred reactor or increase a very high linear flow velocity in a continuous reactor .
There is a reduction but in the internal porous structure the substrate concentration may undergo also a gradient .
This gradient it might so happen that it comes down to zero .
The substrate concentration comes down to zero at this point and therefore all the enzyme present in this phase is not available and apparently it will look as if there is an enzyme activity loss .
So the enzyme activity loss as a result of diffusional limitations is a totally apparent loss .
If you reduce the particle size to the extent that the rate of diffusion is enough to counter or enough to take the substrate up to the interior of the particle .
That means if you can reduce the particle let us say if this particle was only of this much size and this is the center , then it could happen that the enzyme might reach up to the center of the particle .
The substrate might reach at the centre of the particle and all the particle is interacting with the substrate .
So there is no activity loss and that is what really I meant by the apparent loss of the enzyme activity that means by some physical interventions , by reducing the particle size one can overcome the internal pore diffusion .
Similarly by increasing the agitation speed in the stirred vessel one can reduce or totally reduce the thickness of the film and thereby the gradient on the external film diffusion can be minimized .
In the part b and c , you notice the combined effect of partitioning and diffusion .
You see here in the bulk phase , the part b shows that in the carrier particle the diffusional limitations are not very high .
Although there is a very , very mild concentration gradient , the substrate is present all through the carrier particle .
But the concentration of the substrate in the carrier is higher than the bulk .
So there is a partitioning effect .
That means the chemical nature of the carrier has more affinity for the substrate than the bulk .
In the c part the reverse is there .
The substrate has lower affinity that means suddenly from this boundary surface the concentration drops and there is a partitioning .
So these pictures shows the first one is totally diffusion ; the b and c part indicate the combined effect of diffusion and partitioning .
These are the four major parameters or the factors which cause the various effects on the functional properties of the enzymatic reaction .
Whenever we have to look at any particular feature of an immobilized enzyme reaction , we have to look into these four effects and try to find an answer to the observed behavior .
Let us look at some of them .
The first is effect of pH .
Very often we look at enzyme catalyzed reaction unknown to have an optimum pH and particularly in the case of immobilization by ionic binding it has been noted that there is an apparent shift in the optimum pH .
When you take a soluble enzyme , a native enzyme and determine its optimum pH as against the optimum pH of an immobilized preparation you find that the optimum pH has shifted and this shift is attributed mainly to the partitioning of hydrogen ions between bulk and the carrier particles .
That means the partitioning effect of the hydrogen ions between the bulk and the carrier particle depends on the nature of charge .
If suppose the carrier is negatively charged , there will be higher concentration of the hydrogen ions compared to the bulk and vice versa and therefore in the case of a negatively charged carrier , the apparent shift in pH will be on the alkaline side .
Because for the higher pH in the bulk the actual pH in the carrier particle will be lower .
Hydrogen ion concentration is more in the carrier .
So there will be apparent shift in the pH optimum because what we are considering we are not varying the pH in the carrier particle ; we are varying the bulk pH .
So at even a higher bulk pH at the enzyme reactive site the pH will be lower and so we will consider it almost like an apparent shift in the optimum pH on the alkaline side and the reverse is true .
If suppose you take a polycationic carrier , the shift will be on the acidic side .
The second effect of pH is on pH stability ; the same thing , the same partitioning effect .
Particularly in some cases of the enzymes which are known to be more stable under alkaline side or acidic side , an immobilization can lead to increased or decreased stability of the enzyme depending on their behavior , although the pH stability as well as optimum pH in the real sense at the molecular level does not change .
The behavior remains the same .
It ’ s only an apparent change in the monitoring system because we are measuring in the bulk and therefore the two effects are noted .
If you consider the stability fact of the enzyme with respect to pH certain enzymes are more stable under alkaline conditions .
So the immobilization to an anionic polymer will be able to give you a more stable preparation with respect to pH .
I am talking of stability with respect to pH and not thermal .
There will be no effect on thermal as a partitioning effect .
But there will be some effect on the pH stability because the pH what you are offering to the enzyme particle in the bulk is not the same at the enzyme active site .
It is reduced and if it is less stable at the alkaline pH , then even at the higher pH the enzyme particle may show higher pH stability .
Right . They are the same .
The physical reason which attributes to both the effects is identical .
That is partitioning of the hydrogen ions between the bulk and the carrier particle .
As an example if you look at some of the optimum pH of the immobilized preparations , which are reported in literature you notice that in most cases here the effects are mostly on ionic binding .
But the pH effects are noted on a minor site in cases of gel entrapment and non - specific binding and particularly crosslinking effects also .
But they may be a result of a very complex system which cannot be defined very accurately but ionic binding can be defined very accurately .
In trypsin by binding on to DEAE Sephadex the free enzyme pH which was 8.5 was reduced to 7.0 .
Similarly on invertase DEAE cellulose , 5.4 to 3.3 , the immobilized enzyme optimum pH is reduced .
Yes . Diethylaminoethylether has lot of amino groups with positively charged matrix and therefore the enzyme activity is reversed .
On the other hand look at an example here on physical absorption on bentonite .
Bentonite is clay with high negative charge and this attributes to an increase in the optimum pH .
Some optimum pH changes have also been reported in the case of crosslinking but their effect of change in the optimum pH is a result of some other conformational interactions and not due to partitioning .
Particularly the last example of the immobilization of NADH hydrogenase by crosslinking also indicates the shift of the optimum pH but here the optimum pH shift will not be attributed to partitioning effect .
It could be due to some of the conformational changes as a result of crosslinking because conformational changes also can bring in some change in the optimum pH .
A quantitative analysis of the partitioning effect can be given in terms of a factor what we can call the partitioning coefficient , the partition factor which is the ratio of concentration of any specie on the enzyme active site divided by the concentration in the bulk If you consider the pH effects or hydrogen ion concentration it can be described in the two phases .
That means at the solid phase in the enzyme active site and in the bulk phase by Boltzmann type of distribution where you can give the concentration in the enzyme phase that is in the carrier matrix given by H + E = H + B exp ( - e ?
/ kt ) where E is the electronic charge , ?
is the electrostatic potential difference between the two phases , k is the Boltzmann constant and t is the absolute temperature .
Simplifying this you can get ?
pH as equal to ?
pH = 0.43e ?
/ kt ?
is the electrostatic potential difference between the two phases .
That means the potential as a result of the charge in the two phases .
If you notice the shift up to what I have already told you see pH effect change .
A is the native enzyme , B is the same enzyme chymotrypsin immobilized on ethylene maleicanhydride copolymer which is polyanionic and the phase shift is towards the alkaline side .
H is the hydrogen ion concentration which you can convert into pH .
On the left hand side the profile c indicates a pH shift to the acidic side when the enzyme is immobilized on polyorthanine which is a positively charged matrix .
This has been one of the attributes in the case of immobilized enzyme preparation where many times we require a particular operational pH for certain other conditions .
I must give you an example of glucose isomerase .
Glucose isomerase , some of the native enzymes have a pH optimum of about 7.5 - 8 , alkaline .
An alkaline pH for isomerisation of glucose is not a desirable feature because it will undergo a lot of non - specific , non - catalytic , non - enzymatic reactions on glucose isomerisation producing products other than fructose .
Other than fructose , it will produce cyclose and galactose and all other sugars which are not desirable in the product .
A very significant property of apparent change in the enzyme optimum pH has bee used by immobilizing those enzymes to a positively charged matrix .
You can use the enzyme in the bulk lower pH although the actual pH of the active site will be same 7.5 or 8 whatever is the optimum pH of the native enzyme .
But if the reaction can be carried out at a pH in the bulk which is lower , the side reactions can be totally overcome .
So that gives you another major advantage for using an immobilized preparation .
The example of the glucose isomerase is a typical example which has used such a phenomenon .
The other effect of this immobilization is on the kinetic parameters .
Can kinetic parameters also undergo some apparent change ?
Although the kinetic parameters of the enzymes does not change in the real sense but there are apparent changes in the kinetic parameters .
First we consider the km , the Michaelis Menten constant .
In most cases you will notice , if you look into literature , that the km value undergo a change .
The changes can be of various nature .
Different methods have yielded increase in km value , decrease in km value and sometimes no change in km also .
The change in km value can be attributed to diffusional limitations as well as partitioning of substrate .
Very often wherever the substrate is also a charged molecule similar partitioning effect will take place .
There will be a difference in the substrate concentration between the bulk and the enzyme active site as we saw in the substrate profile of the immobilized enzyme particle that in the bulk phase and in the immobilized carrier particle , there will be a substrate gradient and depending on the chemical nature that will undergo and kappm can also be related to km of the native enzyme by kappm = kmez.e. ?
/ kt where z is the number of charges .
It ’ s an observed change .
…… does not change really ; on the on the substrate if we consider the charges on the substrate .
The second reason for the apparent change in km would be attributed to diffusional limitations .
The effects due to diffusional limitations on km have been clearly demonstrated by experimental data because if you just use an immobilized enzyme preparation in a reactor and measure km by reducing the particle size you are able to come to a km value which is of the native enzyme which only implies that the diffusional limitations are playing a role .
One of the result reports the km value of the immobilized glucoamylase on different substrates : soluble starch , amylopectin , amylose and maltose ; four different substrates which can be acted upon by glucoamylase or amyloglucosidase .
For the free enzyme the km values are given here on the left hand side .
For the immobilized enzyme you see the km values have significantly increased except on maltose where it has decreased .
This also gives you the feature that the molecular weight of the substrate can also influence the partitioning effect because the maltose being the smallest molecular weight molecule substrate here , it can easily and freely pass through a carrier particle and thereby one can achieve a much higher km value compared to the insoluble one .
km in the case of maltose has decreased .
It has decreased means higher affinity ; the concentration of the substrate in the enzyme active site is much higher .
This concentration is in the bulk .
So it affects particularly high molecular weights substrates and they behave in a reverse way .
Therefore their concentration usually at the site is much smaller because of the diffusional barrier and therefore the km value is …. .. In most cases they are usually considered to be an increased km value which is not a desirable feature .
This has to be taken care while preparing the immobilized enzyme preparation so that the km value does not increase because otherwise it will lead to a less sufficient catalysis .
Another data is on the influence of particle size on the Michaelis constant of immobilized enzyme .
If you look at soluble starch as substrate as a function of particle size , particle size being in micro meters the km value increases as the particle size increases .
This clearly demonstrates the role of diffusional limitations on the effect of km and with the particle size increasing the system becomes more and more diffusion controlled for the particle is bigger .
For example roughly about two fold increase causes 19.3 grams per liter to 31.6 , a very significant increase in km value .
Similarly on the external film diffusion also the linear velocity of the immobilized glucoamylase using the 30 % weight by weight 40DE corn syrup , the data here are important in the case of starch syrup because starch syrup when we use for hydrolysis we use a very thick syrup .
Even in the case of glucose isomerase when we carry out the industrial reactions , the substrate concentration which is used is about 2.5 - 3 molar glucose which means almost about 45 - 50 % weight by volume .
So it is very thick syrup and at such thick syrup , the boundary film can be very thick .
The film thickness can be very high and external film diffusion in those cases where we use substrates as very thick syrup is usually very high and external film also becomes a major parameter and as shown here if you consider a packed bag reactor with a liner flow velocity from 0.85cm / min to almost as high as 14.5 almost twenty fold increase gives you a km value which decreases from 7.76 to 3.79 almost half the initial value of km .
That means if you are able to overcome external film diffusion the increase in linear velocity means you are reducing the thickness of the boundary film and that ’ s why when we talk of km we are talking only apparent change and not the real change .
The other parameter which is important in the case of kinetic parameter is change in k2 that is the turn over number or in other words you can say if you multiply with the enzyme concentration it becomes Vm¬ .
Enzyme k2 change is solely attributed to conformational changes .
That is if the enzyme undergoes a conformational change its specific activity will undergo a change .
In some cases the change has been favorable .
There have been reports , although rare not very common , that the enzyme activity increases as a consequence of immobilization .
Another functional parameter is temperature which is important for all catalyzed reactions .
This temperature has mainly three consequences ; one is the optimum temperature of the reaction .
Just like optimum pH , we also need an optimum temperature for a reaction which is known for a native enzyme .
In many cases there has been report in the change in the optimum temperature also .
The change in the optimum temperature is a result of temperature gradient across the bulk and the enzyme particle and this is very prominent when you talk of gel entrapped enzyme preparation .
The gel acts almost like a thermal insulating material and therefore the temperature at this site is relatively much less as compared to the bulk temperature and therefore apparently the apparent optimum temperature will be higher than what is required .
At the active site it is the real optimum temperature but in the bulk it is slightly higher because there is a gradient of temperature between the bulk .
Optimum temperature has also been attributed to conformational changes particularly in the case of adsorbed enzyme preparation or covalently coupled preparations where there is no likelihood of any temperature or you can even notice the temperature changes in the case of a non - porous matrix where all the enzyme is just immobilized on the surface of the matrix .
There is no porous network and in those cases if there is optimum temperature change it is attributed to conformational change and diffusional effects are also very prominent with respect to temperature effects mainly because the diffusion itself is a process which is very significantly affected by temperature .
In fact the diffusion process is much more sensitive to temperature effects than many of the catalytic reaction rates .
The rate of diffusion can be enhanced significantly as a result of increase in temperature and particularly in the case where the system is diffusion controlled the temperature optimum might undergo significant change .
In the case of enzymes which are immobilized by carrier binding methods , for example , either by adsorption or by covalent binding where there are no there are no likelihood of much temperatures gradient in the bulk and the enzyme active site this can be very easily checked .
In case if you consider a non - porous matrix where all the enzyme is supposed to be on the surface there is no porous network .
In those cases the change in the optimum temperature will be attributed to conformational effects only because there is no chance of any diffusional effects .
There is no chance of any temperature gradient .
In different cases different kinds of changes in optimum temperature have been noticed .
Then the second parameter which is affected by the temperature is the energy of activation .
The effect of temperature on reaction rate gives you a parameter activation energy and which is considered also to be a characteristic parameter for any chemical reaction and in the case of activation energy the major reason , the contributing factor is the diffusional limitations that is the rate of diffusion because as I mentioned that the diffusion process itself is highly sensitive to temperature and the activation energy in the case of immobilized enzyme preparation is a net resultant of the two temperature dependent processes the chemical reaction and the diffusion .
So the net effect of the temperature on the overall reaction rate which is a combined parameter between the rate of diffusion and the rate of reaction can be different than the native enzyme because there is no diffusional limitation .
In the case of activation energy and optimum temperature I mentioned that different systems have shown different kinds of behavior .
There is increase in activation energy there are reports on decrease in activation energy .
Similarly there is increase in optimum temperature ; there is decrease in optimum temperature and there are cases where there are no changes also .
But one parameter what is understood as storage stability which is attributed to the thermal deactivation of the enzyme with time is always favorable in the case of immobilized enzyme preparation mainly because of the additional intermolecular forces and the intermolecular forces that are involved which keep the process of deactivation to a minimum .
In almost all cases of the immobilized preparation the storage stability has noted to be higher in terms of its half life .
So that is almost a proven fact and that is one advantage we have to take of immobilized enzyme for all operational purposes .
Take an example of optimum temperature of various immobilized invertases .
As you notice here the native invertase has the optimum temperature of 55ºC and by immobilized preparation by different methods or like physical adsorption on activated carbon is 40ºC , ionic binding to DEAE cellulose is 30ºC which is a very significant change .
As I mentioned some time earlier also that the adsorption process undergoes slight unfolding of the enzyme protein and unfolding of the enzyme protein is an endothermic process which results in reduction in the optimum temperature ; alkylation by covalent binding is 45ºC , entrapment is 50ºC .
Here entrapment is solely as a result of insulation effect , the temperature gradient .
In the case of gradient , but here that means there is some conformational change also occurring .
There are some minor conformational changes but not as high as alkylation or ionic binding but there is some conformational change also occurring .
In fact optimum temperature should be higher than entrapment if it is solely by temperature gradient .
No . I am not talking about the stability .
I am talking of the initial reaction rate as a function of temperature ; not stability .
Look at the data on the activation energy of various immobilized aminoacylases .
I will come to operational stability a little later .
Activation energy for the immobilized aminoacylases immobilized by different methods also undergoes a change .
As you will notice that in both the types of behavior there is a significant increase on DEAE - cellulose by ionic binding or DEAE - Sephadex slightly less increase but on covalent binding there is decrease in activation energy and these change in the activation energy is a resultant sum total of the diffusional effects and the biochemical reactions and the entrapment in polyacrylamide also results in decrease in the activation energy .
Why ? It should decrease .
The diffusion will entirely depend on the preparation .
There are both kinds of effects because the preparation can be made to be both diffusion limited as well as if the enzyme loading is not very high it can be biochemical reaction limited also and the activation energy measurements will indicate that figure .
The measurement of activation energy is also used as a kind of a experimental data to check whether the system is diffusion limited or not .
So it will entirely depend on the loading on the preparation .
Here the figures are given under certain experimental conditions in the literature and under which depending on the diffusion limitation or the loading of the enzyme on the carrier will dictate the final activation energy parameter .
Finally the most important parameter which we are concerned within the case of immobilized enzyme is their use in continuous reactors or long term reactions whether we can use them in a stirred vessel or in a packed bed or in a ……… reactors or a variety of reactor configuration that are known to us from chemical reaction engineering and we can see that the parameter which is most important to look at the immobilized enzyme preparation property is operational stability that over a period of time when we use it , it should remain stable .
We measure it in terms of half life and the various reasons which cause the loss of stability during operation are enzyme denaturation , the thermal deactivation of the enzyme , adsorption of the inhibitory substances because the feed stream might include certain toxic substances which might inhibit the enzyme activity .
Bacterial contamination is another very often faced problem in the case of enzyme reactor particularly if you are handling say for example a good nutritive substrate .
Hydrolysis of proteins or even glucose syrup can undergo bacterial contamination .
Then enzyme leakage which depends on the method of immobilization you are following .
If you are using adsorb preparation there will be a continuous reversible desorption process and leakage might be there .
Finally , degradation of carrier itself .
During use , the whole matrix is under certain hydrodynamic condition and which might cause the degradation of the carrier .
You can get different kinds of profile as far as the operational stability of the immobilized enzyme is concerned .
Y - axis is the activity factor , ln E / Eo In the logarithmic scale you must get a first order decay as shown in the first case .
These are the four different kinds of operational stability that have been noted and you will notice that they all … .
to certain discrepancies in the immobilization procedure .
For example in the case of second profile , this one , there is an initial increase of the enzyme activity and then the normal decay .
Very often such a profile is noted in the case of immobilized cells .
In the case of immobilized cells initial autolysis of the cell releases some enzyme and then the enzyme remains entrapped and shows normal first order decay .
But initial autolysis of the cell increases gives some … .
activity . In the third one , there are two steps in decay .
Initially the stability is very high ; suddenly there is a bacterial contamination action and the decay becomes very fast or some fault in the operation takes place .
Contamination is a very usual problem in continuous reactors and therefore you have a very fast decay .
In the case of fourth one initially you have very high decay and then it is continuous .
This is some kind of incomplete immobilization .
For example if you consider an adsorb preparation some of the enzyme is weakly bound which gets dissolved very fast and then the really adsorbed enzyme preparation shows you a normal decay .
So different kinds of operation activity can be seen .
In the last lecture we were discussing about the various ways of classifying polymers and at the end we came at the most important ways to , you know important way to classify polymer is based on its structure and the mechanism by which it is typically polymerized with , on the base of structure we , it was said that you can divide polymerization , polymers in addition and condensation in two ways .
And in case of by the mechanism which you can synthesize polymer you can divide polymer into two classes by step polymerization or by chain growth polymerization .
Now , if you remember from the last lecture that in in case of chain growth polymers , the monomers are not started the polymerization reaction by itself , you need to have external agent which will initiate the polymer chain and once the chain starts , monomer can add one after one and thus completing the chain quickly .
And in this case we have seen or we have discussed in last lecture that the rate of initiation is typically much lower compared to the rate at which the chain propagates and completes .
Now , in case of step growth polymerization , we also talked about that you know you typically have a monomer react with monomer at the beginning gives you a dimer .
And then when the dimer is formed it can react with mono gives you trimer or it can react with itself to gives you a tetramer and this trimer can again react with monomer gives you a tetramer and so on .
So , in case of step growth polymer or step growth polymerization process the polymers are formed in various stages , no , steps first di , tri , tetra , if you stop reaction , step growth reaction after sometime before completion what will you get in the polymerization medium ?
If you remember or recollect from your memory in case of chain polymerization if you stop the reaction in between say after small amount of monomers got reacted , you will find that you have high molecular weight polymer as well as lots of monomers depending upon which stage you have stopped the reaction and also initiator molecules .
Now , in case of step growth polymerization if you stop in between you will see all these small molecules .
These are called oligomers and and a small amount of monomer depending upon at which stage you have stopped the reaction .
So , the high molecular of weight polymers in step growth polymers only form at the later stage , at the very late stage of the polymerization process .
Now , what do you , what I mean by later stage .
Now , first define what is conversion in a polymerization process ?
Conversion is fraction of functional groups that are reacted in the process .
Now , it can be expressed as a percentage or it can be expressed as the fraction .
So , let us take a example I have say 50 , say 25 .
I have 25 A A type monomer one , another 25 B B type monomer .
So , what is the total number of functional group here ?
Total number of functional group , groups are how much , how many ?
So , that is 100 , total number of molecules is 50 .
Now , let us , this monomers all react with each other and in the first step you have reaction monomer plus monomer gives you dimer and for simplistics imagination we just thinking that all are monomers and half of the monomers like 25 of this monomer is reacting with 25 monomers and giving a 25 , dimers for our simplistic understanding we are following simply this process , this understanding .
So , functional groups how many now ?
25 dimers so each content two , each contains two which means functional groups are 50 .
So , conversion is 50 percent and what is the degree of polymerization is 2 , degree of polymerization is the number of structural unit present in the polymer chain or polymer molecule .
Let us consider in the second step all these dimers reacted with each other forming tetramer .
How many tetramer would be there ?
12.5 on average which means you have 25 .
So , if I write the 12 is reacting with 12 dimer 1 is remaining which means that you had 12 tetramers plus 1 dimer left which makes it on average 12.5 tetramers , 12 tetramer plus 1 dimer which resulting at on average is 12.5 dimer .
So , I can write 12.5 12.5 give it 12.5 .
So , how many functional group now present in the reaction term ?
It is 25 .
So , what is the conversion ?
75 percent and degree of polymerization is close to 4 .
You can calculate degree of polymerization from the number of tetramer and dimers present divided by total number of total molecules present in the system .
So , in case of 12 so 12 multiplied by 4 plus 1 dimer 1 plus 2 divided by 12 number of molecules that is 13 .
So , which it gives you close to 4 .
So , let us again for simplicity consider these tetramers are reacting with each other forming octamer .
So , I will write say 6 .
25 of this reacting with 6.25 gives you octamers .
How many ?
So , 6.5 on average .
So , how many number of functional groups now ?
12.5 . So , what is the conversion ?
Is 87.5 which is , will give you approximately a degree of polymerization of 8 .
Let us take another step where you are taking these octamers reacting with octamers forming this 16 mar which is of , which will come around 125 numbers gives you 6.25 functional group 93.75 conversion percentage and degree of polymers is 16 .
So , what I am trying to make you understand , following the simple process where now we just considering the highest in a maximum possible sizes , dimer reacting dimer gives you tetra , tetra reaction with reacting with tetramer gives octa , octa reacting with octamer gives you 16 mar .
So , in this case you can see how the degree of polymerization which relates to the size of the polymer chain or polymer molecules varying with conversion .
So , even at very low conversion I mean low d p you have a high amount of conversion .
So , this emphasize even for example , at say 94 percent conversion you have only 16 d p which is not a polymer yet , it is a still a oligomer .
Now , remember this is I am just following the simple reaction these tetramer can react with dimer , monomer and trimer further reducing the chains .
So , finally , this d p will even at this conversional rate actual d p will be lower than this 16 , 8 and 4 or 2 , I am just talking about the one simplistic case where following the simple reaction .
So , you can now understand that if I plot say percentage conversion with d p degree of polymerization or say molecular weight or molecular weight in case of step growth polymerization , it will only start from a slow… So , in a very low conversion you know the high the the polymer chains only will be achieved , you know high molecular polymer chains will be only achieved at very high conversion close to 98 percentage above .
So , this will clearly give you understanding that in case of step growth polymerization you can have the high molecular weight which is the practical polymer , polymers , which is useable polymers can be achieved only when the conversion is quite high , very high more than 98 percent and so .
So , if I want to compare between the chain and step growth polymerization , percentage conversion verses molecular weight .
In case of chain polymerization you had situation like this where you can achieve the high molecular weight at the beginning and the time goes or the more or monomer get converted , monomer get reacted you get the amount of high molecular weight polymers more and more with time .
And in case of step polymers you get the high molecular weight only at very high conversion .
Now , in some cases the chain polymerization can gives you a situation like this where the molecular weight increases linearly with the conversion .
It arises situation where the rate of initiation is faster compared to rate of propagation and also the reactions which were responsible for terminating a reactive species , reactive chain were absent in this case .
So , in the first case , in this case which is the normal you know which is , most of the general the chain reaction the initiation is slower compared to the propagation , chain propagation or the formation of polymer chain which means as the chain gets initiated it completes very fast .
So , you get high polymer , high molecular weight polymer at the beginning and as time goes more and more chains get initiated .
So , you get more and more polymer with average molecular weight remain same .
But , if you have a situation where your initiation is faster compared to the propagation of chain formation rate that means initiation happens quickly at the beginning and as your chain or monomers get added to the reactive chain ends then your polymer chain grows linearly , as you more and more monomers get added to the reactive in chain ends more and more polymer gets added .
So , your polymer chain increases linearly and in this case it has , if it has to happen , it has to , the reactions which responsible for the chain termination of , by terminating the reactive in groups has to be absent in this case so that polymer can , polymer chain can increase linearly .
So , let us compare between the two polymerization processes one more time in the chain and step polymers .
In case of this left side is step polymers and this side is chain polymers .
So , as you seen that step polymers happens stepwise .
So , if and the reactions are between functional groups .
So , reactivities of those functional is not very high and it is it is a equilibrium process , and and during the reaction you have to make sure that your equilibrium goes towards right by taking out the bi product formation from the system .
So , it takes much longer time compared to chain reactions where the reactions happen quickly in a shorter time .
Obviously as the reaction , reactivity of the functional groups are lower you need high reaction temperature to overcome the activation energy , which requires your your reactions to be done at very high temperature .
Now , high temperature reaction is not only to increase the reactivities in or the equilibrium constant of the reaction , but also if you want to remove , if somebody wants to remove the bi product like say water in polyester formation or say example , a water formation water form polyester formation to take out the water you have to increase the temperature high and put a high vacuum so that you can take out the water from the system which will give you the equilibration towards product side towards right hand side which will lead to formation of polymer molecules .
And in other case of chain reaction you can do it with lower reaction temperature as well because the reactivity of these monomers are quite high .
In case of step growth polymers you generally get a bi product formation and , but if there are example where this reaction happen without formation of bi product formation and in case of chain polymers there is no bi product formation .
And as I said repeatedly in case of step polymers you get the high molecular weight only at high conversion where in case of chain polymers you can get high molecular weight even at low conversion , with time or with conversion only the number of high molecular weight chains or the amount of high molecular chain increases .
In case of step polymers the monomers as you have seen from the earlier pages that monomers disappears early from the reaction whereas , in case of chain polymers the monomers disappears steadily with time and as monomers disappears you get high molecular chains forming and typically even step growth polymers you have heteroatom in the backbone whereas , in the chain polymers typically are formed by the carbon backbone .
Now , this classification of step and chain growth polymers also is not completely unambiguous .
For example if I have a monomer like this , propylene oxide and I make a polymer from this .
Now , by from looking at the structure of this molecule or in polymer molecule it is , because it is , has a heteroatom in the backbone with the group it seems like it is a chain growth , step growth polymers , but it is the mechanism of this polymers resembles more of a chain polymers of the type I mentioned in last page , so more close to chain polymerization .
So , this type of ring opening polymers by structure you may confuse with this , with the step growth polymers , but actually from mechanism the way it is synthesized this is more close to a chain polymerization of this type than a step growth polymers where the polymers are formed step wise , dimer , trimer , tetramer and so on .
In this case the formation happens by addition of monomers towards the chain end .
More more example of such can be given where this classification is not completely unambiguous .
So , what the conclusion , what the final message you should remember that this addition and chain polymers or chain growth polymers they should not be used interchangeably and so as your condensation and step polymers .
So , you should remember that though this addition and chain polymers are quite quite similar in terms of the structure and most of the chain polymers are made by addition reactions and most of the step polymers are synthesized by condensation reaction , but they are different they should not be used interchangeably .
Some U , IUPAC has suggested that this should be named as poly condensation in then instead of step polymers or step growth polymerization , but step growth polymers is much more broader nomenclature compared to a term like poly condensation which is which is narrower .
So , now I move to a a new topic nomenclature .
How do you name polymer molecules ?
Again like the various classification ways , you know various ways of classifying polymer molecules this nomenclatural so also not very unambiguous .
The most easy simple and least ambiguous method of naming polymers is from its source , from source that means if you have a polystyrene , this is styrene .
So , you just prefix this term poly followed by the monomer term and you name this as a polystyrene .
So , acrylo acrylonitrile would give you poly acrylonitrile and so on .
So , this is very simple where and this is done mostly from if the polymers are made from a single monomer which monomer is directly converted to the polymer , so styrene to polystyrene and acrylonitrile to poly acrylonitrile .
And say ethylene oxide to poly ethylene oxide .
Now , if I write this poly ethylene oxide this might give you different structure depending upon how do you represent this molecule .
If I write this like polyethylene oxide put a bracket , it might look like this polyethylene or a cyclic .
So , if I write polyethylene oxide that means oxide of polyethylene .
It will look like this , but if I write the same molecule polyethylene oxide then it will mean this .
This is polyethylene oxide which is actually what it is , this is ethylene oxide and you get a polymer from this like this .
So , if you have a multi worded monomer , multi worded then you must put a bracket before prefixing the term poly .
So , in this case ethylene oxide you must put a bracket that the monomer inside the bracket and then prefix the term poly .
Otherwise , if you do not put a bracket it might gives you a confusion of you know which finally , which structure it is .
Some other example we can give .
And if there is the monomer is very complex you know or it has substituted parent name also you have to put bracket before you prefix the polymer poly term .
For example , poly methyl methacrylate .
A polymer form from 3 methyl 1 pentene because these are substituent ’ s .
So , you have to put this monomer term within bracket .
So , if I have a monomer like this epsilon caprolactam , I get a , by ring opening polymerization I can get this polymer .
Now , this will , how do you name again because this just a polymer of the monomer , so poly caprolactam caprolactam .
Now , same monomer can be synthesized from condensation of 6 amino caproic acid , you can get the same polymer which were shown here .
The same polymer can be achieved by a ring opening polymers of epsilon caprolactam and a self - condensation of 6 amino caproic acids .
So , you can also write this as 6 amino caproic acid .
So , the same same structure , same polymers sometimes can be named in a different way you know .
Sometimes , the polymers are named from hypothetical monomers for example , I have this polymer are generally synthesized by hydrolysis of this vinyl , polyvinyl acetate .
This is vinyl acetate and I put poly term in between , it will give poly vinyl acetate .
So , this polymer is generally formed by hydrolysis of the polyvinyl acetate , but if you look without knowing that that it has synthesized from hydrolysis of these you can imagine or hypothesize that it has been synthesized from this monomer which is vinyl and alcohol .
Now , you know as a matter of fact that this does not exist as such independently because it exclusively exists at its tautomer of acetyl diode , but because this polymer looks like that it has been synthesized from a hypothetical monomer like this , this is this polymer is generally named as polyvinyl alcohol .
So , this is some cases where this is one of the example of where you name the polymer from a hypothetical monomer .
How you typically name these step polymers ?
Now , we just gave example of this alpha 6 amino caproic acids condensing to 6 amino caproic acid poly caproic acid in last page , this one .
So , if if this is , if the polymer is forming from by poly condensation or step growth polymers from one monomer then you can simply write prefix poly and put the monomer name after that ’ s , that will gives you name .
If it is form from two monomers likes this terephthalic acid plus ethylene glycol you get polyethylene terephthalate .
In this case you indentify in the polymer structure in which class it belongs for example , whether this belongs to a ester class or a carbonate or a amide or urethane .
So , you first identify the polymer , look at the polymer and identify which class it it belongs and then name accordingly from which this polymers is synthesized .
So , when you make a polyester from this two monomer terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol you get a polymer which is polyester .
So , you know how esters are named .
So , name accordingly .
How do you name this then ester form from terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol ?
So , you name it ethylene terephthalate and because it is a polymer so you are writing this poly ethylene terephthalate .
So , similarly , you can name other step growth polymers as well where you have to first indentify the functional group or the class in which they belong and then accordingly you name the polymer .
So , so a polymer which is found forms abscisic acid and hexamethylenediamine , abscisic acid and diamine acid and amine which will you have to put name as a amide .
So , hexamethylenediamine plus abscisic acid you will call that polymer as a polyhexamethylene abscisic amide , you understand .
So , if it is a polyester , you have to name as a polyester like polyethylene terephthalate , if it is a amide you have to name as a amide .
Now , IUPAC because there is so many confusion or about naming polymers IUPAC has given a guideline how to name polymers .
For that you have to first identify the constitutional repeat unit of the polymers .
The repeat unit we talked about that means if you write a polymer structure and the bracket you have put n that means you have to find the the portion thus unit which is repeating .
So , if you build a polymer structure which which structure has to be repeated .
So , in case of polyethylene , if you want to write polyethylene you know this is repeated and once you identify the constitutional repeat unit then you have to place this different parts of this repeat unit according to the seniority from left .
You identify the , you already identified the repeating unit and how do how do I name the repeat unit ?
You have to place the repeat unit such a way that the seniority the one , the part which is senior most gets the , you put in the extreme left hand side .
Now , how do you determine seniority ?
You follow the order like heterocyclic ring chains with hetero atom , carbocyclic ring and chains with only carbon .
So , if I I have polyethylene oxide .
Now , IUPAC suggest that we have , I have indentified this is the repeat unit , constitutional repeat unit in this polymer polyethylene oxide , but according to the seniority you have to write this as this .
So , name has , will be polyoxyethylene instead of polyethylene oxide .
So , though we name polyethylene because we know that this polymer has been made from ethylene molecule , but because the constitutional repeat unit is this then according to IUPAC you have to say this as a poly methylene .
So , how do you name this one ?
Now , in commonly it is known as polyisobutylene , but according to IUPAC it will be poly 1 1 dimethyl ethylene .
What about this ?
Very common polystyrene , accordingly IUPAC it will be poly 1 phenyl ethylene .
So , the PET molecule polyethylene terephthalete we have to write according to the seniority , the constitutional repeat unit like this and IUPAC name accordingly would be poly oxy ethylene oxy , this is tere phthaloyl .
The IUPAC name becomes you know very complicated , very difficult mostly for this step growth polymers .
So , these all are very easy to name in our conventional way as polyethylene terephthalate .
Whereas , IUPAC would suggest that you name this has poly oxide ethylene oxide terephthaloyl .
So , it has become very difficult .
So , that is why IUPAC nomenclatures are not very you know used very regularly unless you are making a completed new monomer , new polymer from a new monomer or the the name of the polymers is not conventionally available like polystyrene , if I write tell polystyrene as poly 1 phenyl ethylene you know first time somebody hears the person will not be able to correlate what is , what he is talking about , what I am talking about , but if I say polystyrene it is very easy for the person who is listening , it is easy to comprehend the structure .
So , typically IUPAC nomenclature is not followed in case of polymer nomenclature .
Unless you have a new structure from a new monomer then you have to name , there is no common name existing .
So , you have to name according to IUPAC or is very complicated name , complicated structure where common names are very difficult like co polymers and and so on , the kind of structures are very difficult commonly then you apply this IUPAC nomenclature procedure and name the polymer .
And also in case of polymer specially in case of this the polymers which are sold in large quantities they have trade names .
Trade names width , this is known commonly known in the market and the problem in case of because as I said in earlier classes that in earlier lectures that you , when you use the final a polymer material , you do not use the polymer as such from the synthesis and after it coming out synthesize you add with some other additives and then make compounding and finally , form a product out of that so that the final use of that polymer is not as such 100 percent polymer , there will be some other ingredient has to help and that that plastic or that final use of that polymer , that is no , you said the company so sell this as trade name , where the problem is in trade name that somebody who is know learning polymer chemistry or it is very difficult to remember because same polymer will have different trade names coming from different companies .
A polycarbonate would be called lexan by SABIC , makrolon by Bayer and so on .
So , they flexi glass will be PMMA from one supplier , with some other company .
So , it is very difficult .
When somebody who is in the market , who is practicing regularly that person which is practicing polymer scientist or polymer chemist is probably useful for them to you know , necessary for them to remember the trade names as well along with the the common name or the the names which typically used for the polymer molecules .
So , after this nomenclature we will move to one of the important aspect of polymer molecular weight .
Now , molecular weight you know is relative term that means is a , the weight of a molecule compared to divided by the weight of isotope C 12 , for sometimes it also more correctly it mentioned as molar mass which is basically the mass of 1 mol of that molecule .
So , you have a unit , molecular weights are unitless whereas , molar mass has a unit gram per mol or kg per mol typically gram per mol .
So , in this course we will use this both the terms molecular weight and molar mass and as you you can understand that these are almost same you know , you can as long as you remember what the meaning is you can use this two term molecular weight and molar mass independently .
Now , as I said very beginning that when you make a polymer , polymer molecules and polymer samples always comes with a distribution of molecular weight , not all the chains are of same size , there are not of same sizing , not all the polymers are same size , same .
So , you always have a something like a distribution big , small , medium like that .
Now , we will only see the mechanism of polymerization .
We will probably more appreciate why you cannot have all the polymer chains of same size or same molecular weight .
There always has to be a distribution .
Now , when you have a distribution to characterize or to represent this sample having different polymer molecules of different sizes you have to mention the average mass , average molar mass , we will say the mixture of several molar mass molecules you have to mention a average and also the distribution .
Then only it will represent the actual sample what in your hand or what you are handling with .
So , how do you , the polymer are , polymer molecular weights are defined , a simple arithmetic average by total weight divided the number of molecules which gives this , gives us that number average molecular weight .
Number average molecular weight .
Now , again you can write number of average molar mass as well , it is , represent as sometimes like this , some books write like this .
So , you can choose to write any of this and sometimes simply M n , because we know the , as a polymer person or when we using polymers in a sample that always is a average .
So , even if you write simply M n it will understand , it will be understood by all of us , we are seeing that it is a average molecular weight , so number average molecular weight .
So , you can mention any of this symbol or you can simply mention M n .
So , we will in this we will use M n for most of the time .
It is a simple arithmetic mean so M n would be total mass or weight by total number of moles .
So , we are talking about molar mass in this case , total weight you have , if you have i number of molecules you can sum with i and you can sum in the vision .
N i is the number of molecules , number of molecules in that sample .
In the sample having mass of w i .
So , total mass will be given by total summation of all the molecules divided by total number of moles , number of molecules in this case , it is a moles .
We are talking about moles , number of moles of these things .
So , we can write n i , this is M I .
So , how do you get total molecular weight ?
Total mass of the sample n i is the number of moles having molecular rate of this .
So , you multiplied each one n i M i which will give you the weight of or mass of the , that sample and you sum over all the samples and divided by total number of moles gives you the M n 1 , number average molecular weight or you can simply write this as x i M i where this x i is mol fraction of the molecules having molecular rate of M i .
So , M M n number of average molecular rate is nothing but the simple arithmetic , it is the simple arithmetic mean , average of your sample .
So , you get total mass n i M i dived by total number of moles which gives you molecular mass , molar mass , mass in the , mass gram per mol .
We defined the second molecular rate which is M w bar or M w or M w which is weight , molecular weight which is defined at , in last case we had this , the mol fraction multiplied by the molecular rate of individual fractions .
In this case we have weight fraction multiplied by the molecular weight of the individual fractions .
So , w i is the weight fraction of the molecules having molecular rate of M i .
So , I can write individual molecules by total weight .
So , weight fraction by total weight of the individual fraction divided by the total weight and individual fraction is given by n i M i .
So , you have another M i which will give you n i M i square .
So , you get M w as this .
Remember what was M n ?
M n was n i M i by n i .
Now , in case there is another molecular weight defined M z which is M i cube M i square , this is M z and sometimes viscosity is used as to determine the molecular weight which gives you viscosity average molecular weight M v which is all the expressions are similar , close to each other .
So , this is viscosity average molecular weight .
This is z average molecular weight , but most commonly this two terms are used and those are sufficient for your description of your sample and to quantify the breadth of the distribution this term is used poly dispersive index or simply sometimes dispersive index which is given by this ratio .
So , the higher is this ratio higher is the poly in dispersive index that means higher is the breadth .
So , if you have the polymer sample weight fraction M i like this compared to something like this , this will be , they maybe have similar molecular weight average , but they , this will be much more broader , they will highly will be DI value for this sample will be much higher compared to the value for this sample .
So , typically how this , what is the ranking M z is always higher than M w , then M v and M n .
Now , these two are quite close to each other .
M v and M w are very close to each other .
So , of this all the four molecular rate we talked about M n is having the least value , M z is the highest and then M w and M w and M v are very close within 10 to 20 percent .
M v is always lower than M w , but it is very close within 10 to 20 percent .
So , if I plot weight fraction between and the molecular weight or M I , this is molecular weight the curve is , will look like this , this and this will be say M n , M w , M v and this will be M z .
And M remember M w by M n is PDI poly dispersive index .
So , in the next lecture I will continue , no why ?
What is the necessary for having more than one molecular weights for a given polymer sample ?
Why , cannot we just say M n ?
We will try to see whether , now , the necessity of , we can explain with the , why with that , what is the necessity of this define molecular weights .
So , in this lecture what we have learned ?
We have learned the classic continuous and classification that that detailed differences between your chain polymers and step polymers and then we studied the nomenclature .
And we have studied the molecular weight and we will continue from the molecular weight and move to the step growth polymerization mechanism in next class .
Having discussed some of the characteristic features of enzymes in the light of their chemical nature , today we will discuss the functional nature of the enzymes and as most of you are familiar , catalysis is the universal property of enzymes .
The essential characteristic of a catalyst is to accelerate the rate of reaction that it is supposed to catalyze , but in the process it is not used up in itself and in an ideal situation it must be possible to recover the catalyst at the end of the reaction .
As a biocatalyst in the living systems two very significant characteristic properties of enzymes are noted that is the catalytic efficiency .
As you will notice , as we go further , that the enzymes provide a much more efficient catalytic system than their chemical counter part .
There are basic intrinsic mechanisms and the confirmation of the chemical nature of enzymes is the responsible factor for providing the catalytic efficiency .
We look into the basic factors that provide the catalytic efficiency .
When I say catalytic efficiency , I normally mean the magnitude by which it is able to increase the rate of reaction compared to an uncatalyzed reaction or the turn over number of the enzyme that means number of moles of substrate converted to product per unit time per mole of the catalyst .
The other feature which is very important is their specificity which is again not attributed to chemical catalyst and the enzymes provide a very specific catalytic system specific to the extent that we can recognize even the isomers they can distinguish .
Therefore it will be interesting to note how they catalyze the reactions such that these properties are built in , in the system .
Another feature which I think must be important to note is that an enzyme like any other chemical catalyst does not influence the thermodynamic status of the reaction .
That means whether it is the free energy change or the equilibrium constant of the reaction , it remains unaltered during the process .
It only accelerates the reaction rate by an order of magnitude .
Now just as an example if you look at isomerization of glucose to fructose , the reaction can be catalyzed by an alkali say NaOH .
You can get isomerization .
You can also carry out isomerization by enzymatic route using the glucose isomerase .
In both the cases the equilibrium constant of the reaction is approximately equal to one .
So whether you carry out the reaction by alkali or by the presence of glucose isomerase , the reaction will end up under equilibrium conditions at an equimolar mixture of glucose and fructose and that remains unchanged .
The only difference , lies by the virtue of the presence of a catalyst or an enzyme in this case , will be that you can reach to the equilibrium status much faster than in the case of an uncatalyzed reaction .
Besides the equilibrium conversion or equilibrium constant of the reaction , the catalysis or the enzyme catalysis also follows all thermodynamic concepts that are applied to chemical reactions .
Some times it may look in the case of living systems that certain reactions that are catalyzed are in totality have a positive free energy change .
An example could be cited of conversion of carboxylation of Acetyl coenzyme A to Melonyl coenzyme A .
The enzyme carboxylase catalyses the reaction .
The reaction has a free energy change of + 4.5 kilo calories per mole .
The reaction must be non - spontaneous , should not take place as per the normal thermodynamic concepts .
But we all know that this conversion does take place in the living cells .
Apparently it may look as if enzyme is doing something which is not allowed by a chemical thermodynamics but in practice it is not so because the reaction is catalyzed in association with another hydrolytic reaction which is energy yielding , which has a much higher negative free energy change and that is hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and inorganic phosphate .
The free energy change of this is highly negative – 8.9 kilo calories per mole .
While the reaction takes place as a coupled reaction of the two systems , the net reaction is a coupled reaction where the acetyl coenzyme carboxylation is coupled to hydrolysis of ATP .
But in practice the reaction does take place in a living cell as shown in the second half .
That is the enzyme which uses biotin as a cofactor activates the carbon dioxide at the expense of energy of hydrolysis of ATP and you get activated carbon dioxide with a negative free energy change which is a spontaneous reaction and this activated carbon dioxide then carboxylates the acetyl coenzyme A to melonyl coenzyme A , an enzyme along with the cofactor biotin is released free .
The second reaction is also a negative free energy change and therefore it is also carried out and the net reaction is the sum total of the two reactions , what we have shown here .
Therefore another feature is that the enzymes often show certain behavior which can be explained on the basis of coupling of more than one enzyme reactions where by we are able to produce certain net results which may look apparently to be non feasible but otherwise they follow all the laws of chemical reaction kinetics as well as thermodynamics .
The catalytic behavior of enzymes can be probably best illustrated by chemical reaction rate theory .
One of the most accepted theoretical interpretation of chemical catalyzes can be considered from point of view of chemical reaction rate theory which illustrates that molecules can react only if they come in contact with each other .
That means the molecules do undergo certain collisions .
Therefore for different molecules of reactants to react collisions must take place .
Any factor or any parameter which increases the frequency of these collisions between the molecules will tend to increase the rate of reaction .
Of the two of the most sort after parameters , one is temperature .
We know that if we increase the temperature of a reaction system the frequency of collisions will increase and there by the rate of reaction .
Another is if you increase the reactant concentration again there also the frequency of collisions will increase and therefore rate of reaction will also increase .
However while collisions among the molecules might lead to product formation as per this chemical reaction rate theory , it is also understood by virtue of some of the studies on the distribution of molecules which undergo reaction that not all the molecules that collide will result into the product .
Only certain molecules which have sufficient energy to undergo reaction will result into the product formation and it will be only a fraction of the total molecules that participate in the collisions process are able to yield the product .
If you consider two molecules in a binary reaction , bimolecular reaction that is A and B and both of them are in their ground state keeping in view all their electronic , vibrational and rotational ground state but possess translational energy which makes them to move for the collisions to take place .
If they are to react when they collide the rearrangement of the electronic confirmation in each molecule must take place .
Consider two molecules say for example A and B which are supposed to react in the presence of a catalyst or without a catalyst .
If the reaction has to take place , then they must start colliding with each other .
Initially they will be at a ground state of their electronic , vibrational and rotational ground states but they will posses the translational energy which can make them move and collide .
They can only react when the rearrangement of the electronic distribution in each molecule perhaps by transfer of atoms from one molecule to the other takes place .
It is clearly pointed out by Eyring in his transition state theory that every chemical reaction proceeds via formation of the unstable intermediate between reactants and the products .
Take the example of hydrolysis of an ester , a very common reaction even occurring in the case of enzymatic reaction .
To the ester molecule a water molecule is added .
This addition of water molecule results into an unstable transition state compound , which has partial bonds , partial negative and positive charges at the molecule .
This is a stable molecule which has much higher free energy change than the reactants and will break down to give the corresponding acid and the alcohol .
Eyring ’ s transition state theory states that for each reaction to occur it must pass through a transition state which is an unstable state of the molecules or unstable state some where in between the reactants and the products and which has much higher energy than possessed by the reactants of the ground state .
This energy requirement is considered as the energy of activation .
That means the free energy required for the reactants to reach the level of transition state compound is considered as the energy of activation .
The transition state compound will ultimately break down to give you the product or in other word the energy of activation acts a barrier .
Unless the reactant molecules cross the barrier they cannot get converted to the product .
From the energy diagram , consider the first stage which is an uncatalyzed reaction .
In the case of this reaction you see the reactants are at a ground state .
The X - axis denotes the extent of reaction the Y - axis is the energy content and then the molecules have to undergo an increase in energy till the point where a transition state is reached and then this transition state will break down , will undergo reduction in energy and lead to the products .
These are the reactants and these are the products .
The difference between the ground state and the maximum level of energy at which the transition state is generated is called as energy of activation .
If you look at the energy content of the molecules it will show you a Gaussian distribution .
That means energy content per molecule and the number of molecules in a system will have a Gaussian distribution and only those molecules that possess sufficient energy which are showed here by a shaded portion , only that fraction of molecules will undergo chemical transformation .
That means the transition state will be able to break down and form the products .
Rest of the molecules which have much lower energy content will not be able to lead to product formation.On the other hand when we consider the second area where we use a catalyst the main role of a catalyst as we will also further confirm is to reduce this energy of activation by some means .
Whether it is chemical catalysis or enzymatic catalysis the primary function or the primary route by which a catalyst functions is by reduction in this activation energy .
You see that the energy of activation from here is reduced to this level .
The number of molecules , the fraction of total number of molecules has increased , which possess sufficient energy for the transition state molecule to break down into product , and large number of molecules can then take part in the reaction and result ultimately into the product .
In conclusion by lowering the energy of activation for the reaction , a catalyst makes it possible for substrate molecules with a smaller internal energy to react .
Even at a smaller internal energy level the product formation can take place .
You can see the related concentration of the shaded portion in the two cases without the catalyst and in the presence of catalyst .
That will illustrate the point .
Here it is the low energy of activation as a result of catalyst and this indicates the high energy of activation in the absence of any catalyst .
If we look deeper into the transition state , the formation of transition state can be described as a very easily studied , as an ordinary chemical equilibrium process .
As I mentioned earlier the reactant molecule has to pass through a transition state .
The formation of transition state starting from A and B can be considered as a simple chemical equilibrium process .
That means A and B combining to give you an activated complex AB * with an equilibrium constant of Keq or you can put it as say K * .
K * = [ AB * ] / [ A ] [ B ] [ AB * ] = K * [ A ] [ B ] ( 1 ) This chemical equilibrium follows the other relationships .
That is the free energy of activation which is required in this whole process can also be given by E * = - RT ln Keq ( 2 ) Rate of reaction between A and B mind that we have not undergone the whole reaction process .
We have only come to the transition state complex and the rate of reaction will depend upon the concentration of AB * .
The larger this concentration of the transition state complex , the higher will be the rate of reaction and this rate will depend upon the frequency at which the activated complex will decompose and this rate of decomposition will depend upon the vibrational frequency of the bond that is breaking .
From transition state some bonds have to break some has to form .
Ultimately the transition state complex is somewhere intermediate between the reactant and the product .
Some bonds are partially formed , they will be completely formed .
Some bonds are still in the formation stage and therefore the vibrational frequency of the bond that is breaking will determine the rate of the reaction .
This frequency can be arrived at from the theoretical treatment from two routes , by quantum mechanics as well as from classical mechanics .
Consider the frequency of energy of excited oscillator by quantum mechanics you get E = h ?
and in classical mechanics you get E = kt h is the planck ’ s constant , E is the energy , the ?
is the frequency .
Similarly here the k is the Boltzmann constant and T is absolute temperature .
Therefore ? = kt / h = RT / Nh You are familiar with all these terms .
That is R is a gas constant , T is absolute temperature , N is the Avogadro ’ s number and h is the Planck ’ s constant .
The frequency at which bonds in a transition state complex will break will be determined by these factors which can be obtained by equating the energy of an oscillator by two treatments .
We had as we mentioned earlier the rate of the reaction r r = ?
[ AB * ] ( 3 ) The rate of reaction will depend upon the concentration of the transition state complex and the frequency of the break down of this transition state complex can be written as r = RT / Nh K * [ A ] [ B ] ( 4 ) The expression we got for the concentration of the transition state complex from the chemical equilibrium process .
This term RT / Nh x K * is the second order rate constant .
Let us say we define k2 as second order rate constant for the reaction of A and B .
It becomes K2 [ A ] [ B ] ( 5 ) or in other words the second order rate constant will be nothing else but k2 = RT / Nh K * ( 6 ) Again you notice a significant fact here that the rate constant is directly linked .
All these are constants .
Temperature is a constant .
If the temperature is constant these are all constants .
So the rate constant is dependent upon the equilibrium constant of the transition state process , the conversion of the A and B into the transition state complex and this also gives you a relationship between the rate constant and the K * , equilibrium constant of the formation of transition state complex .
It will imply or it will also be a very logical conclusion that the faster reactions , if the reaction has to go very fast rate , then they must have larger value of K * .
That means at a very fast rate the reactants must go into the transition state or they must have higher concentration of AB * .
This equation will also allow you to calculate the value of K * and hence the value of activation energy during your earlier equation that is your E * E * = - RTlnK * If you use the equation number 6 and 2 you can calculate the value of energy of activation for a given system .
You can also conclude that the faster reactions will have a smaller value of E * .
No . Energy of activation is not equal to KT .
This is the energy of the oscillator , energy term for the oscillator based on the classical mechanics .
This is not energy of activation .
E * is energy of activation .
Energy of activation can be calculated from here which will be related to K * and also can be related to k2 and the two conclusions which we can make from make this analysis is that the fast reaction will have a higher value of K * , equilibrium constant for the conversion of reactants into the transition state or in other words the fast reactions will have higher concentration of AB * at equilibrium .
The second is that the first reaction will have smaller energy of activation .
If you combine equations 6 and 2 energy of activation for faster reaction if the k2 is high that means lower energy of activation.These two conclusions do arrive from the theory of reaction rate which is now well accepted world over .
If you look at what we talked about KT = RT / nh x K * ( 6 ) you can also write k2 as k2 = RT / nh x exp ( - E * / RT ) ( 7 ) Now this as all you know we call it as frequency factor which is often written as A .
The frequency factor A * you can say because A is the reactant , A * exp ( - E * / RT ) which is a very common expression what we all know as Arrhenius ’ expression .
The term E * can again be separated into both enthalpic and entropic contributions E * = ?
H * - T ?
S * from second law of thermodynamics .
That means the energy of activation can also be considered both in terms of entropic contribution as well as enthalpic contributions and if you separate into it then you can write k2 = RT / nh .
exp ( ?
S * / R ) .
exp ( - ?
H * / RT ) The final conclusion is that for a catalyst or an enzyme in our case as we are talking about to be able to include the value of k2 , it must be able to reduce the energy of activation or increases the K * value that is equilibrium constant .
This conclusion will apply commonly to a chemically catalyzed reaction or an enzymatic catalytic reaction .
If you look at the performance of some of the enzymatic catalyst as compared to chemical catalyst , you will notice that enzymes provide very efficient catalyst .
Simple example where I can compare the reaction which can take place both by chemical catalyst as well as by enzymes is hydrolysis of hydrogen peroxide that is break down of hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen , a very common reaction that takes place in living cells by the enzyme catalase .
It can also be carried out by colloidal platinum .
The reaction is also feasible under normal conditions without any catalyst .
That means not a very non spontaneous reaction .
It is possible to carry out the reaction .
The corresponding energy of activation for this reaction without any catalyst is 18,000 kcal.mole - 1 as against in the presence of colloidal platinum as catalyst it is 11,700 and for the catalase it is 5500 .
This is just an illustrative example but a similar example can be sited from a variety of reactions that can be carried out both by chemical catalysis as well as by enzymatic catalysis and the conclusions are almost same .
The enzymes are able to bring down or reduce the energy of activation to a very large extent compared to chemical catalyst and we will again see how this is done .
Another interesting reaction in the living systems is on oxidation of methane .
The methane mono oxygenase enzyme oxidize methane in to ethanol spontaneously in the living cells particularly those organisms which can survive or consume methane as a carbon source .
This is the very first reaction which they carry out when the methane is used as carbon source .
This reaction can also be carried out chemically using a chemical catalyst , like zinc catalyst at 400ºc and high pressure , almost few hundred atmospheres , and the turn over number is of the order of 2 x 104 s - 1 , that means number of moles of methane oxidized per second per mole of the catalyst .
The same reaction if you carry out at ambient conditions , 25ºc and ambient atmospheric pressures the turn over number is as low as 1.5x10 - 7 , almost negligible .
In the presence of enzyme , methane mono oxygenase at 25ºc and obviously at ambient pressure the turn over number is 2.2 x 103 , a much higher value although it is lower than the one which is obtained at 400ºc and few hundred atmospheres .
But compared to ambient conditions and the same catalyst , the catalyst here is zinc and the value is much higher .
Very often a comparison of the first and the third case is not logical because the reaction conditions are different and comparing the turn over number may not be a very reasonable proposition .
But if you compare under the same conditions the enzyme as a catalyst will provide you much more efficient system and one should look at how the enzyme provides this kind of efficiency compared to a chemical catalyst because the ultimate goal in both cases is the same , to reduce the energy of activation .
But the enzyme is able to reduce the energy of activation to a large extent as compared to chemical catalyst and also its turn over number is much higher .
Let us see what happens when we consider an enzymatic catalysis .
Now in the case of enzymatic catalysis we must bear clearly in our mind that one of the characteristic features is that enzymes has a certain ligand binding sites and more specifically substrate binding sites .
That means an enzyme can bind to substrate forming enzyme substrate complex .
This enzyme substrate complex then again provides a system which will undergo the energy of activation , undergo the transition state before the product is formed .
Consider an enzyme catalyzed system and an uncatalyzed system .
If you consider let us say E + A + B , same as what we are talking about reaction between A and B .
Consider two routes .
One is E , the enzyme does not take part in reaction , an uncatalyzed reaction and it goes to E plus P .
In the second case we can also have that enzymes binds the substrate A and B and forms a enzyme substrate complex EAB .
It also undergoes a transition state EAB * and then it goes to enzyme and product .
Let us consider the rate constants k here ke here .
The lower route is catalyzed one , enzyme catalyzed .
The upper root is uncatalyzed .
That means the enzyme has no role to play here .
The enzyme binds to the substrate and then undergoes transition state and then forms the product .
In the middle case from the enzyme and transition state AB you can also form the EAB activated complex .
If you consider the equilibrium constant of all these equilibrium reactions let us say this is K * , this is KS , KE * and K * s .
Thermodynamically we can notice that ultimately we are interested in this .
As a catalyzed reaction , we are interested in the EAB * , which is the transition state complex which will give you a product at much faster rate .
Ke is much , much higher than K , the lower being a catalyzed reaction .
Catalyzed reaction will have a much higher reaction rate and so to really get the reaction at a high rate we want a larger concentration of EAB * .
If you look thermodynamically , this product EAB * can be obtained by either of the routes .
Either it can go this way and come here or it can also come this way and reach to this side .
From either way under equilibrium conditions , it is possible to arrive at this complex and if you consider the two routes then your KS .
KE * = K * .
KS * Multiplication of equilibrium constant of these stages should be equal .
As I said earlier KE is greater than K and also K = RT / nh .
K * Therefore the KE * &gt ; &gt ; K * and it will imply that KS * , equilibrium constant is much , much greater than KS .
This means that the binding of the enzyme to the AB complex , uncatalyzed AB complex is much , much larger than the KS , the binding of the enzyme to A and B .
This implies that the enzyme binds AB * more tightly .
The higher value of KS * means the enzyme binds AB * more tightly than the substrate molecules .
The general concept that the enzymes have certain substrate binding sites on molecule but conformationally it is more complementary to the substrate transition state and that was the contribution which was stated in very clear terms by Linus Pauling that enzymes are molecules that are complementary in structure to the activated complexes of the reactants they catalyse .
The attraction of the enzyme for the activated complex would thus lead to a decrease in its energy and hence decrease the energy of activation for reaction and to an increase in rate of reaction .
The enzyme is in structure confirmationally which is very much complimentary to the transition state of the substrates and by binding that it stabilizes those transition complex .
Stabilization of transition state means that the enzyme because of its confirmation which is complimentary to the transition state , binds and stabilizes the transition state complex .
So at any given equilibrium the concentration of the EAB * that is the product of this binding is much , much higher than as if enzyme does not take part .
If suppose this enzyme was not a bio catalyst .
Suppose this E would have been a chemical catalyst this binding would not have been feasible because there would have been no complimentary catalytic function .
The catalyst might be able to perform the catalytic function by any other mechanism : by acid base catalysis or covalent catalysis which we will discuss later but the contribution made by stabilizing the transition state of the substrate will not be possible to be provided by the chemical catalyst which enzyme is able to provide and there by it increases the stability of EAB * and thereby reduces the energy of activation and leads to the formation of the product .
That was a major contribution in the understanding of the enzyme functions made by Linus Pauling .
For any reaction whether it is unimolecular or bimolecular the substrate or the reactant has to undergo a transition state .
The product cannot be formed without undergoing a transition state .
As a matter of fact practically there are hardly any reactions , very few reactions , which are single molecular .
Apparently hydrolysis may be unimolecular reactions but it is not so .
Even in the earlier example we discussed the hydrolysis of esters , it is an addition of water molecule to the ester which leads to transition state .
So most of the reactions undergo or involve either cofactor or water molecule , excepting certain isomerases which are truly unimolecular .
But even in that case the molecule has to undergo a transition state otherwise the catalyst reaction is not feasible according to reaction rate theory .
Coming back to the role of the energy of activation on the reaction rate constant , if you take arbitrary value of energy of activation , say from 25kcal mol - 1 downwards to 5kcal mol - 1 , a decrease of activation energy results in a very significant increase in the reaction rate .
The magnitude at every step of reduction of energy of activation by 5kcal mol - 1 you will see that starting from 3.16 x 10 - 6 at a energy of activation of 5kcal mol - 1 you will go up to 1.33 x 109 .
That means an increase of magnitude by 1015 fold of the rate constant .
It is a very , very significant increase in the reaction rate constant and it will give the rate of reaction under any given set of conditions .
That means if you maintain same temperature and pressure and substrate concentration increase in the reaction rate constant by a factor of 4.58 x 103 fold can be achieved for every drop of 5kcal mol - 1 which is a very , very large .
So therefore even a decrease of the energy of activation by 5kcal mol - 1 can lead to an increase of the reaction rate by a factor of 4.5 x 103 .
Very significant number and in case of most of the enzyme the decrease is of the order of about 15 - 20 kcal mol - 1 in the case of energy of activation .
Therefore one can achieve a very high catalytic efficiency in the case of enzymatic catalysis and as you notice that this efficiency is primarily achieved by two distinct factors as we saw today which are unique compared to the chemical catalyst .
One is that enzymes have binding sites for substrate molecule .
The second is the enzyme conformation itself is complementary to the enzyme transition state complex thereby it can stabilize the transition state and increase the concentration of transition state in any given reaction at equilibrium .
Now if you look at the whole picture of the enzymatic catalyses again , in the energy diagram we notice the bold lines which go here from the ground state E + A + B uncatalyzed reaction that is the non enzymatic reaction is this one .
The molecules have to reach to this state of the energy so that the transition state can form and then it can be broken down to form the enzyme and the product .
What happens in the presence of an enzyme molecule ?
The enzyme binds to the substrates A and B , forms EAB and this process also undergoes energy of activation .
That means some amount of energy is released by this binding and the enzyme substrate complex instead of starting from the level of ground state of A and B now has reached to a state little higher than ground state by binding process and from there it goes to the bound state .
Even the binding process will undergo the transition state and for this binding process EAB is the product .
Then from here EAB has to go to transition state EAB * as I showed in the earlier comparative figure and this EAB * is much , much smaller than the energy level of AB * for uncatalyzed reaction .
So you have an advantage .
This EAB * is reduced by virtue of the complementary nature of binding of the enzyme molecule to the AB * .
The concentration of EAB * is increased by significant amount and at lower energy level this equilibrium can be achieved .
Two factors which contribute to the reduction in activation energy or the efficiency of the enzymatic catalyst are : one is binding of the substrate and other is complementary of the enzyme molecule to that of the transition state .
The same process follows on the reverse of reaction that means EAB * under goes break down into products whereby instead of product directly being formed it forms EP , the enzyme bound to the product , the enzyme product complex and then this EP again breaks down to the next level of your product which is same as of the uncatalyzed reaction .
Therefore one is by binding process the enzyme processes started at much high energy level then the ground state as applicable in the case of uncatalyzed reaction and the other is the complementarity of the enzyme conformation to that of the transition state complex .
These two factors put together give you much higher catalytic efficiency as we noted in the case of one of the examples which I have illustrated to carry out the conversion of reactants into product .
The dotted line here indicates the process .
In fact I have shown here only one step just for sake of clarity and removing the congestion whereas this process might undergo more than one humps .
For example binding of E to A , the EA further binds to B in different sequences depending on the nature of catalysis .
But there can be more than one processes undergoing here and thereby the binding process can provide you a large fraction of the activated energy to be compensated during binding process and reducing the energy of activation .
Such a process therefore leads to a very efficient catalytic system .
In my first presentation I mentioned about the specificity .
Coming back to the specificity the presence of ligand binding sites on the enzyme molecule are responsible for specificity .
The so called ligand binding sites and when we consider ligand binding site along with the catalytic sites what we consider as active sites on the molecule they constitute for the specificity and we will discuss that in our subsequent lecture .
So today if you recall we have considered in general the basic theoretical considerations behind the catalysis as it applies to any chemical process .
Secondly how enzyme under the same background is able to provide much larger reduction in activation energy and provide a more efficient catalyst compared to chemical catalyst .
With this we will stop .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
In last lecture , we were discussing about polymer properties and their evolution .
And we did a detail discussion about mechanical properties , and we also discussed about thermal properties , and little bit of fire resistance properties of polymers .
In today ’ s class what we will do , is to go through the other properties , like optical properties , electrical properties , barrier properties , and environmental properties , surface properties .
And not in detail just briefly , and then begin our discussion on chemistry of polymer additives .
So , let us start our discussion on optical properties ; now when you make a material out of the polymer , like plastic material .
Now the look that sticks of the material , or the parts , depends upon several optical properties .
For example , if we are going to make a plastic material or polymer material , which are intend to be a optically clear applications , then the plastic part or the polymer part has to be transparent .
And if it is for absolutely clear application , then there should not be any haze or any yellowness in the material and so on .
And in opaque applications , there are other properties like gloss , reflectance , yellowness index and so many things , surface roughness .
So those are the things , one must consider before for a , before you apply or before you have a polymer product out in the market .
So , if we look at these optical properties of a plastic material , you can list a number of terms , transmission , refraction , reflection , scattering , absorption , clarity , haze , gloss , yellowness , index by premium color and so on .
So , what I am going to do is , not to discuss each and every term , but pick up few important term , and then explain and then , see how the value of the particular property , or value of the particular parameter , depends on the chemical structures .
For example , let us talk about transmission first .
Now what happens when a light travels through a matter .
If you are talking about the plastic material , obviously you are talking about a , you are thinking a plastic material or polymer material , when light travels through the , a polymeric material what happens ?
Obviously , first thing happened that it , when it just heat the polymer surface , or the part surface , it can get scattered from the surface of the polymer , if the surface is rough , and of course reflection , part of the light gets back to the original medium by reflection .
So , basically when , a light travels through a material , in this case a plastic material or a polymer material .
First thing happen is , surface scattering or reflection , and because of that there will be loss of intensity , of the light passing through the main material , and scattering from rough surface , also will lead to reduction in the clarity of the material , and of course , increase in the haze .
Now we will discuss , or define this term , clarity and haze in a minute .
So , basically because of surface scattering and reflection your transmission comes down .
In the bulk what happen , bulk they could be two thing happening ; one is scattering can happen , and now because of scattering , there will be loss of intensity of light , and molecular absorption can happen , due to presence of some cromophrous , or some pigment in the material , which could lead to formation of color in the medium .
So , because of scattering and absorption , there will be loss of intensity .
So , the bulk extension coefficient , is consist of bulk scattering , and molecular absorption .
It may be noted that , this absorbed light can be reemitted , but that reemitted light is always less , or at best equal compared to the amount of absorbed light .
So , there will be a drop in intensity , when light pass through the matter , due to surface scattering reflection , and bulk extension .
Now let us discuss little about this bulk scattering phenomenon , which happens very frequently in a polymer material .
Now the scattering happen , due to in homogeneities in the refractive index in the medium .
So , if there are in homogeneities present , in the polymeric material , there could be , or there will be , bulk scattering ; for example , if you have some particles , so small particles which are , there are voids or some have bubbles are there , then in a homo polymer metrics .
Then there will be a difference in the refractive index , within the media and those portions that just now I mentioned , there will be scattering , took to scattering to happen the two conditions has to meet ; one they should be difference in I RI refractive index between the scatter and the medium .
Obviously , if there is a particle present in the medium , whose refractive indices is same as the polymer refractive index , then there will not be any scattering happening .
So , first and foremost criteria for scattering to happen , is that there should be a mismatch , or in homogenates in , homogenates in the refractive index , between the scatterer and the medium .
Second ; obviously , the amount of scattering will depend upon , the size and the shape of the scatterer ; the more the size , in comparison to the white plane length of the light being scattered , the higher would be the amount of scattering .
For example , phases of crystalline phases , in a semi crystalline material , the amorphous in the crystalline phases will have a different refractive index , so that will cause scattering , and for this reason actually most of the crystalline polymers are opaque in nature , because of the heavy amount of light scattering .
If you have fillers , which are having higher size , compare to , is not very small size , have a significant diameter , then their will scatter light .
Immiscible blinds are block copolymers also have difference in , the refractive index between the , two phases form by the two homopolymers , or two blocks , they will also scatter .
A liquid crystalline polymers , because they are different in homogenous in the refractive index , for a liquid polymer crystalline polymer , LCP ’ S .
Now for a single component polymer ; say for example , there is a homopolymer we were talking about , or a copolymer immiscible copolymer , they can also scatter slightly , due to presence in special variation of RI , due to presence of some stresses , moldered stresses , or reason vision , there could be some may be very small , but small in homogenates in the refractive indices value , across different places of the material , and therefore that reason there could be slightly , slight amount of refractive index .
So , if you want to have , you want to make some polymeric material , which does not , or should not have any scattering , then your material must be very homogenous in respect to the refractive index value , across the inter medium .
And as I said the presence of the impurities like voids , bubbles , etcetera may also cause scattering , obviously the refractive index values between , the material polymeric metrics , and the voids of the bubbles will be different , so depending on the size of these voids of bubbles , they will scatter a light .
Just take a rear example of block copolymer , of BPA polycarbonate and PDMS .
This is a structure of the block copolymer , where this block consist of a PDMS block , and a base phenyl polycarbonate block , depending upon , which is higher , this polymer may be a , as elastomeric or thermoplastic if , the amount of rubbery phase that is for PDMS is higher , high siloxane percentage , then this polymer BF block on a BF as elastomeric , and if the amount of siloxane is lower , than this block copolymer behave as thermoplastics .
Now let us talk about low concentration of siloxane ; say about 5 to 10 percentage , we are talking about thermoplastics .
Now because these PDMS is stitched with the other block , then they do not face separate in such a way , that they come out or delaminate from the total matrix .
So , they make this PDMS form small domains of PDMS , in the entire matrix , which is mostly BPA polycarbonate , we are talking the composition , where it is mostly BPA polycarbonate , and may be 5 percentage PDMS .
Look at the refractive indices of this two , PC is 1.58 , and PDMS is 1.4 , so ; obviously , there is a mismatching in refractive index , so they will scatter a light .
And depending upon the amount of scatter , the transparency will come down , and higher the scattering , the transparency will be low less .
Look at the transmittance T m , or transmission electron micrographs , these black portions are the siloxane domains , and the background is the BPA PC .
Now in this case , this a , the block length of PDMS is higher , as a result this domains sizes are higher .
So , it scatters more , and the transparency is transparency is very less , in fact , this is opaque .
Whereas when the block length is small , then they also scatter , but the size , because of the size is so small their scattering amount is low , so this block copolymer , the polymer material made out of this block copolymer will look , transparent , but slightly hazy .
So , if you look at the optical properties of the polycarbonate , light transmission is more than 88 percent for this 300 thickness pluck , and haze is about one percent whereas , in block copolymers b , where the domains are having smaller sizes , that is all that the scatterer size is very small .
There transparency has come down , because of scattering , but not that much , haze has gone up .
Whereas when there are scatterer size is much higher , then the polymer is become completely opaque .
So , basically what I again telling that , the scattering amount of scattering , depends upon the refractive this mismatch .
If there is , you can make a block copolymer or a two phase system , where the two phases same refractive index , no matter what is the size of the scatterer , it will not scatter , but if there is difference in refractive index , the higher is the size of the scatterer , it will scatter more , and it may turn opaque whereas , if the scatterer size small , it will scatter less .
So , there will be drop in transparency , but it will not , may not be opaque .
Now let us talk about , little bit about , the transparency of a polymeric matrices .
Now we just learn that , when light falls ; say in a plastic material , or any material , there could be three possible phenomena happen ; one is , the scattering are reflection from surface , second is , the scattering bulk scattering , and the third is your absorption .
So , the total flux , of the light coming in .
Let us terribly part of light , which will gets transmitted .
Now if I consider phi , as the intensity of the , or flask of the incoming light , and .
So , this is the flask of the incoming light , and if I consider phi u n , is the flux of light , transmitted and deviated , from its original path .
Then percentage of transparency , is given by the fraction of light , transmitted , and deviated , through the metrics .
Now we can also write , that the light , the flux of the transmitted light , which went out and deviated , would be phi , is the flask of the incoming light minus , the phi d 2 reflection , from surface , minus phi scattering in all direction .
We discussed about , what is the cost for scattering , and phi absorption .
If there are some mities or some which absorb light , then it will absorb light , and it will decrease the intensity of the , out flask of the outgoing transmitted light , this might give you color in the medium .
Now , this depend , these two depends on the thickness of your material , and also lambda , the wavelength of the light , which are used .
So , obviously , this valued percentage , and hence the percentage transmition , we will also depend upon the thickness , and the lambda of the , or the wavelength of the light used .
Now , if we have no scattering , or no scatter present in the medium , in the polymer material , and also there is no nothing which is absorbing .
Then obviously , this transparency is , only given by the loss due to the reflection .
So , if you can find out theoretically , what will be the extent of reflection , then we can find out , what will be maximum transparency , of any material or a plastic material , and that is theoretically given by fractional equation .
So , theoretically from fractional equation ; the maximum transparence is given by this , where n is the refractive index of the polymeric media .
So , obviously , if we talk about say for example , take a case of PMMA poly methane methylculate , which as RI 1.49 , then percentage T maximum .
So , the maximum percentage T of a PMMA , if you put this value here , it will come around 96 percent .
So , this is the maximum transparence you can get , out of a PMMA material .
So , higher is the refractive index , lower is the maximum transparency , one can get , when a light pass through a polymeric material , but you one can never get this high amount of transparence through a polymeric material , because there will be some in homogeneity in the refractive index the medium , even this for a homo polymer , and that will cause some amount of loss of flask of , the incoming light or transmitted light , due to scattering .
So , maximum transparence for PMMA in real case , we get about 92.8 percents .
So , that 3 percent transparence is lost due to , presence of scatterer , and this value is for lambda around 380 diameters to 110 meter ; say lambda changes , beyond that this value , might change .
So , what do you learn from here that , less then , if there is no scatterer present , or no nothing is present which is or observing light , in the polymer metric then , the transparences dictated , mainly by the value of the reflect index .
So , if you compare , shall I PMMA with a BP PC , which have a reflective index 1.594 , then obviously the maximum transparence possible , for PMMA is higher than a .
So , if you want make a transparent , or you want to increase correspondent poly metric material , then you should look for a polymer , which has have lower reflective .
Now in this , what is reflective means , it relates to the polarisability of the molecules present , polarisability of the molecules present , and that the order of polarisability depends upon , normally size of the group present , so polarisability of different groups will be of like this .
So , the values of reflective index , if it is right , then say PET , we will have a value of 1.64 , PC equal 1.594 PMMA 1.49 , and say PTFE will have even lower reflective index .
So , if the polarisability is less , the refractive index will be also lower .
If you want to make a transparent polymer , then ; obviously , for a given thickness , and for given wavelength , it ’ s always preferable to use a polymer , having lower refractive index , then a polymer with having a higher effective index .
So , just discuss about the transmission and talk about Haze .
Haze is defined as a percentage of the transmission light , which is passing through the specimen , deviates from the incident beam , by forward scattering .
So , obviously if there is something present in the medium polymeric material which is scattering , and it typically scatter in all the direction , then amount of forwards scattering , the amount of lights which is scattered , is , and which deviates from the incident beam , by forward scattering is , what is Haze .
Now , for calculating are defining Haze , we will only considered forward scattered light flask , which deviates more than 2.5 degree , on average than the incident light beam .
So , original .
So , with the lights , the forward scattered lights , which is scattered beyond 2.5 degree , compare to the incident light , would be taken as the value for Haze , and Haze characterized the loss of contrast , that result when object are viewed through the scattering medium .
So , for example if this is a loss of Haze , because of Haze , lose of contrast , so if you are using two plastic material to view this two , then ; obviously , there will loss of contrast .
If you are looking through a Hazy material .
.Now Hazy is cost by both surface scattering , and balls scattering , and you can remove if you want to know what is the contribution from surface and balls scattering , in the Haze , then what can be done .
You can actually deep that plastic material , in a liquid or similar refractive index .
Now in that case , that will minimize the surface scattering , because the surface is now smooth , because they are dipped in liquid .
So , the Haze is mainly because of the balls scattering .
So , from that value you can exchange , distinguish between , or find out what is the contribution from the surface scattering , and balls scattering on the Haze value .
What is clarity , clarity of ability of the sample , to transmit the find details of , the object view through of .
It ’ s basically , is a resolution , how good resolution , you can get , when you going through a plastic material , so if the clarity is less , then the material or the resolution will come down .
So , a material if it look at through material , which has lower clarity , then you will low resolution of the object will come down .
It is tongue relatives to the angular the distribution of the scattering light , as scattering intensity , and if the size of scatter is large , the angular distribution of scattering intensity will be higher , so it is always prefer to minimize the size of the scattering center , to get maximum value of the clarity .
And obviously , depends on the distance between the object viewed and the sample , and there is , if there is light absorption in scattering visibly , clarity will be lost .
Next terms we be discussion about reflection and gloss ; reflect reflectivity is defined as the ratio of the intensity of reflected light , to the incident light .
So , the more amount of incident reflected light .
More reflection means the reflective will be higher , and that depends upon angle of incident of the light , and angle of refraction , which in turn depend on the refracting index of the medium .
So , in this case also if you , your refracting index of the material , or polymer is higher then , the reflects reflectivity is also higher .
And if your angle of incident is higher , the reflectivity is higher , and this reflectivity is given by this expression , where alpha is your angle of incident , and beta is your angle of refraction .
Gloss relates to the reduction of intensity of lights scatters specularly of the surface .
Specularly means the angle of incident is same as , angle of refraction like a perfect mirror .
If the a surface is not smooth ; say it has rough , then the lights which are getting reflected specularly , from different region , they will have different distance to travel to the observer .
So , they will be a phase difference and as a result they will be decreased in the intensity .
So , if the sample is half , then the amount of , or intensity of the light , which is specularly reflected will be lower , and there will be reduction in the value of gloss .
So , it is better if you want to make a glossy surface , then the surface should be smooth .
And also if your , the sample is having a larger refractive index then , as a result of higher reflection value , your gloss will be also higher , how do you measure gloss .
Gloss is measured , are related to the intensity .
It basically measured as a ratio of reflectivity of it ’ s , of a sample , to the reflectivity of a standard , and typically the standard is taken as a optically flat black glass , for a particular incident angle .
So , basically this is considered a perfectly reflecting material .
Then the reflectivity compare to this , for a material would be given by , will give the value of gloss .
So , gloss will increase with the increasing refractive index , as I discussed that increasing refractive index , the amount of reflective light is higher , so obviously , gloss increases .
Has increases with the angle of incidence , gloss decreases with the roughness ; obviously , the reason that I said that the distance , travel from the surface to the observer , would different from different region , as a result they will phase difference , and intensity will come down .
And if there a optical homogeneities just beneath the surface ; obviously , the amount of light scattered , reflected will be different , and the gloss will come down .
Other factors like polymer surface , morphology , processing parameter mold finish , which would give us the smoothness of , which basically dictates the smoothness of the molded parts , so they also affect the value of gloss .
For example , blending with rubbers usually leads to decreased gloss values , in case of crystalline polymers like polyolefin .
So , you know gla we now discussed , we know the , what is haze clarity reflection , and gloss .
One more time we want to discuss in optical properties ; birefringence .
Birefringence is basically , optical phenomena , which a sample exhibit different refractive indices , for differently plane - polarized light .
So , refractive index value for two perpendicularly polarized light , we will have different value .
So , crystalline polymers , they have different refractive index , in particular perpendicular directions , so they will have different values , they will be birefringent .
In terms of molecular level , the polariziability in one direction , and the perpendicular direction ; say for example , one very higher aromatic polycarbonate , where they are different , so their molecularly birefringent , but we do not measure the molecular birefringent , we measure the microscophic birefringent for example , and that is given by the difference in the refractive index , in the two different direction .
So , if this not zero , then we consider the sample is birefringence , and for very optically useful material , it is commonly that , the birefringence should be lower .
Just if we talked about the electrical properties of polymers , and we just talked about electrical conductivity , and we know that most polymers are insulating , and so they are dielectric .
And polymeric dielectric used in capacitors , and as a insulators , so basically this are the two main use of polymers , in polymers , in electrical samples .
And the value of electrical conductivity , you have the normal poly polymers ; like polyethylene polystyrene , they have values of electrical conductivity just like insulator .
Whereas , the other end , extreme other end ; the metals the metals which are having much higher conductivity , and they are perfect conductor .
In between there are few polymers , which highly conjugative polymers , they have conductivity in the range of semi conductor , and they are called conducting polymers , and they basically not the commodity , or they are not produced in large amount .
They very they produced in small volumes , and we are not going to discuss much about conducting polymers .
The only thing what I want mention , is the examples of few conducting polymers like ; polyanile , ploypyrrole and structures are given here .
Next , we want to discuss little bit in brief , the barrier and permeability of the polymers .
Now think about , that you making packing material out of polymers ; for example , if you taking perfume bottle .
Then if you want that , the perfume to be remains in the bottle for as long as possible .
So , you want the polymer material to be behave as barrier to that perfume whatever is there inside .
For example , polymer self , heavy used as a packing material for foods , and mainly .
They are so many other applications , and for that it must have some properties , and foods especially , they has to be flexible , they mostly has to be transparent , and they also have a specific barrier properties .
So , barriers polymers are having low permeability co efficient , and restricted passages of gases , vapors , and organic liquids .
And if the polymers in barriers applications like , packaging industries , the demand going day by day , for preserving flavor , safety of food products .
The permeability is opposite to the barrier , basically more permeable means less barrier , or more barrier means less permeability .
The permeability is define has the product of , solvability of a gas or vapor , in the polymer matrix , and its diffusion co - efficient .
So , basically permeability is given by , two factor ; the solvability of the gas or vapor in the polymer , and the diffusion co - efficient of the gas in concern , and it is measured , as the permeability is measured , as the rate of transfer of the vapor or the gas per unit area of the material , and per unit measured difference across the flame thickness .
So , basically it is normalized , with the area , as well as the pressure difference across the flame thickness .
However , plastics are still not as good as barrier materials like , glass and metals .
So , there is still necessity of making plastics , materials which can be as effective as like glass and metal , for barrier applications .
So , we just said that the barrier , or the permeability properties of polymers depends upon the , diffusivity of the gas concerned , and of course , the solvability of that gas in the particular polymer .
Now the diffusivity of the gas depends upon chemical structures , so it does not .
Only dependent upon the molecular structure , but also in the crystallity and crystal morphology .
In a semi crystalline polymer , crystalline region are highly densed region , and basically it acts as very high barrier , to any diffusion through it .
So , basically higher the crystality , higher is the barrier property for that polymer .
And in fact , if you increase density of the polymer matrix , the barrier properties goes up .
So , if the free volume is higher , which means they are the region , the free regions where the gas can diffused through , which means the diffusivity will be higher .
As we discussed the higher the crystality , crystalline regions are inpermeable ; hence lower is the diffusivity .
Higher is tortousity , lower the diffusion .
Tortousity means , is the path , one has to travel to cross that thickness .
So , if I consider one example .
Now if I have a polymer metrics , and they are .
So this is , for example , compare a polymer matrix , just plan polymer matrix , and a polymer matrix , with all this .
These are ; say for example , clays .
These are clays , which are exfoliated in the matrix .
Then , if a gas has to pass through this medium , then it has to take longer path , like this , compare to a path where , you do not have this clay materials .
So this means this is a tortures path , and higher is this tortures path , the higher is the barrier , to the gas to pass through .
And if diffusivity increases , with the decrease in the size of the gas molecules .
Obviously , for well known reason , so transmission is follows , for everything is same .
Given everything is other is same , transmission rate will go up for a smaller size gas , compare to a higher size gas .
Second parameter , which is responsible for permeability is the solubility , and solubility of a gas in a polymer depend upon , the chemically affinity between gas , and the polymer we are talking about ; that depends upon the solubility parameter of the gas , and the polymer metals , we discussed earlier , when we discussed the polymer solutions , we talked about the solubility parameter .
So , basically the higher the solubility , it is higher is the permeability of the polymer matrix towards that gas .
We also briefly talk about chemically resistance , chemical resistance is basically a property , where a polymer is being in contact with certain chemicals , and after a given exposure , time the property of the retention is measured .
So , if you talk about mechanical property , then after the exposure , the mechanical property like , impact tension strength , there is a compact or the ductility .
Those are compact with the value which was , before the exposure to the chemicals .
And if there is less detoriation in the values of those property , then the polymer will be resistant to chemical , so this is as simply .
You can talk about mechanical properties , or optical properties , like glass Haze , with in contact of the chemicals of the optical properties might change as well .
And the resistance of the polymer , to varies chemicals depend on number of criteria ’ s .
Obviously , it depends on the chemical structures ; for example , if hydrolysable groups .
If you bring contact , if you bring that polymer in contact with acids , or basis , then it will hydrolysis , and as the molecular degradation will happen , the properties will come down .
Similarly it should not react with the chemical you are bringing in contact with .
Solubility of the polymers with the experimental chemical ; obviously , to be resistant , the polymer must be soluble , in the experimental chemical , and that depends on the crystallinity and the morphology .
The higher is the crystallinity , normally the resistance to the chemical is higher .
So , crystalline polymers are much more chemically resistant then , amorphous polymers .
If you are modeled in stress ; like while modeling , because of some other reason , because not good flow in the material you have a , built in some stress .
Then obviously , in any given opportunity , the polymer will try to release that stress , and one opportunity of its come contact with the chemical , it might release that stress , by cracking or crazing and so on .
So , modeled in stress is basically bad , for a polymer to be resistant , to a chemical .
While testing the several test parameter must be consider , for comparing the chemical resistance , or resistance of different polymer for example , time , of the contact with chemical temperature , at which you are doing the experiment , the stress level .
What is the external stress you are applying during the experiment , concentration of the chemicals which are using , type of exposure , whether you are just contacting , or emerging in that particular chemical .
So , this all parameter has to be standardized , if you want to compare between , the chemical resistances of different polymers for particular chemical .
If you want to make bottle , plastic bottle for a perfume , or say something else like , alcohol , then obviously , that plastic material has to be resistant to that of alcohol , to be survived for long time .
So , these are the typical application , where we test for chemical resistance .
Chemical resistance ; obviously , chemical exposure may result in physical degradation , stress cracking , craze , swelling , discoloration , so many things can happen .
And obviously , it can do chemical attack , and bring down the molecular weight .
And if you decrease the molecular weight ; obviously , there will loss of , lot properties including mechanical properties , thermal properties and so on .
Just briefly discussed the weathering of polymer , with lot polymer are used in outdoor applications .
So , for , to understand how long they will survive in that condition , outdoor condition , you must whether ability , or mechanism which a polymer gets weathered .
So whether ability is basically noting , but the retention of property , of a particular polymer after it has gone through , or it has stayed outdoor , whether for some amount of time .
So , the higher whether ability means , it has , it will retain , the polymer retained the properties for a longer period of time , in that given weather condition .
What are the condition in weather which affect the polymer properties , is UV radiation in most extend , and that will depend upon , which session you are winter summer , what is the exposure angle , latitude , which latitude you are polymer exposed ; heat cycles , so that will depend upon what temperatures , what is your air temperature and so on .
The moisture content in the environment , and that will depend upon rain , condensation , humidity .
It is also depend upon acid rain , other polythene .
So all these things contribute to the weathering of the polymers , to different extent ; for example , the UV radiation is the most important parameter for , responsible for weathering of polymer , so they decreasing importance is , this way .
So , if you want to compare whether ability of different polymer , you must have a standard conditions , which is very difficult reproduce , and you must compare a conditions , depending upon , or looking at the final application .
Basically you cannot say just your polymer is weather able or not .
So , you are polymer can be weather able are not depending upon , where it is used , which place , and which condition and so on .
And this are all factors which I listed here , it may not be responsible , you know have different response .
So , different polymers response to these factors will be differently , so there is no uniformity condition as I was just mentioning .
So , it will depend upon the final outdoor application , where these polymers are used .
So , what I will do , one I will stop for this lecture , and in the next lecture , I will start the discussion of polymer additives , and some of the additives , which are used to basically protect the polymers from this weather conditions , including see UV radiation , and some additives which might use useful or added to polymer , to increase the perform of the polymer .
So , let us stop for this lecture , and I will start the discussion of polymer additive in the next lecture .
In the last lecture we had discussed Michaelis Menten kinetics as applicable to enzyme catalyzed reactions and also the proposed modifications by Briggs and Haldane , whereby he confirmed the formation of enzyme substrate complex and the steady state hypothesis with respect to the formation of ES complex and that the enzyme substrate complex is in steady state soon after the reaction starts .
After a very brief induction period the concentration of enzyme substrate complex comes to a steady state .
That was initial hypothesis and based on this hypothesis we had also arrived at a rate expression vo = k2 E0 S / Km + S I am just writing here only the capital letters for the concentration terms without putting the parenthesis and km = k - 1 + k2 / k1 ; Vm = k2E0 These two parameters that is Michaelis Menten constant and the maximum reaction velocity can be used to characterize an enzyme .
I also pointed out that Vm is not a constant ; it ’ s a function of enzyme concentration and we must take a corresponding kinetic parameter as k2 which is often called as turn over number .
One of the most important features of these kinetics which I like to reiterate are the assumptions that are involved in arriving at these rate expressions and I would like you to clearly consider them while applying this kinetics to any experimental situation .
As we also mentioned right in the beginning , that any kinetic analysis will involve the match between the hypothesis , the rate expression and the experimental data .
Therefore whenever we look at any experimental data you must ensure that under certain set of conditions the assumptions that are built in , in the Michaelis Menten kinetics are true and they are met .
Just to reiterate the assumptions , the major assumption which were made here are formation of E - S complex .
We have assumed that the enzyme has a single substrate binding site and on this the substrate molecule binds and E - S complex is formed .
This also limits to a single substrate reaction .
The kinetics is basically developed on single substrate enzyme catalyzed reactions .
It doesn ’ t directly interpret the multi substrate reactions which are so common in the case of biochemical systems .
The third assumption is it talks of initial reaction rate and when I say initial reaction rate the emphasis is that the product concentration is almost zero .
That means we are talking at the rate when there is no product formation .
So inhibition by the product or the effect of product concentration on the reaction rate has been negligible .
Fourthly we also assumed that the substrate concentration is much , much larger than enzyme concentration which is in most cases a very true assumption and the enzyme concentration being a catalyst is very , very small compared to the reactant as is also the case in most of the catalytic reactions .
The implications of this assumption are the fact that when we monitor the reaction rates we can safely assume that S0 is approximately equal to S .
That means substrate concentration at any given time because not much of product is formed and therefore such an assumption can be held true .
Briggs and Haldane hypothesis was regarding the steady state with reference to E - S complex .
But this is a very loaded statement in the sense particularly a deviation from the original Michaelis Menten hypothesis which states of equilibrium of E - S .
Here you must appreciate that when we talk of equilibrium of enzyme substrate complex with enzyme and substrate molecules it means that the break down of enzyme substrate complex into product is a very , very slow process and it does not disturb the equilibrium process of the enzyme substrate binding .
That was the original concept of Michaelis Menten .
But this was disputed by Briggs and Haldane particularly observing certain reactions which were known to be relatively fast .
Then you cannot say that the break down of E - S into product is a very slow step and a reasonable rate of break down will disturb the equilibrium .
Therefore he mentioned that the rate of break down of E - S and rate of formation of E - S are probably the same and E - S remains under steady state .
So the rate of change of concentration of E - S is zero and the steady state assumption .
That is a very major understanding which we must appreciate .
Finally very simplistic assumption is that we always monitor or study or consider these kinetics in terms of constant pH , temperature , ionic strength and all other environmental parameters we try to keep constant .
May be some times water activity and all those parameters are maintained constant .
Any kinetic analysis should be made keeping in view the mechanistic hypothesis , the rate expression and the experimental data .
For understanding or for probably analyzing the experimental data for any given enzyme catalyzed reactions we can simply use Michaelis Menten hypothesis directly .
But the direct use of Michaelis Menten hypothesis or Michaelis Menten equation has a limitation because it represents a rectangular hyperbola where the maximum reaction velocity is an asymptotic situation and you can never experimentally reach that .
Therefore it often gives problem in determining the various reaction parameters particularly the Vm and the km values .
So therefore this simplistic way as we were also talking yesterday was to linearize the Michaelis Menten equation and one of the simplest ways to linearize was double reciprocal plot .
That means you take reciprocals on both the sides of the expression .
1 / v0 = 1 / vm + km / vm.1 / S Such an equation which is double reciprocal on both the sides of the Michaelis Menten equation represents a straight line and the experimental data can be easily analyzed based on 1 / s vs 1 / v profile .
The expression will represent a straight line with a slope of km / Vm and intercept on the y - axis as 1 / vm and intercept on x axis as - 1 / km .
This was one of the earliest analyses for the experimental data in the light of Michaelis Menten hypothesis .
It was noted to have very serious limitations and the serious limitations are that if you look at any set of data for enzyme catalyzed reaction that means data on the substrate concentration versus reaction velocity you will notice that the experimental data gave very low weightage to the measurements at low substrate concentrations .
Most the data points will be rather concentrated near the origin where as weightage at a low substrate concentration will be very , very low .
Under weightage at the low substrate concentrations and at high substrate concentrations near the origin the data points will be heavily concentrated .
If you consider substrate concentration in millimolar quantity and the reaction velocity in some arbitrary units , you see at 5 , 1 / S will be 0.2 , 10 - 0.1 , 15 - 0.66 , 20 - 0.05 , 30 - 0.033 , 40 - .025 and so on .
You see that when you increase the substrate concentration the weightage to 1 / S concentration is so low that ultimately you end up in a scattering , a cluster of data near the origin and therefore getting the realistic value of km and vm often tends to be difficult even after making a statistical analysis .
Therefore a number of other linear plots were thought of and the other linear plots are Hanes plot which is nothing else but the modification of original equation .
That means if you multiply the Lineweaver Burk equation simply by substrate concentration on both the sides you arrive at S / v0 = km / vm + S / vm This also represents a straight line and if you see a graphical representation of such a plot of substrate concentration verses S / v0 , you will again end up in a straight line position with a slope of 1 / vm and intercept of km / vm , the intercept on the X - axis as - km .
Here you have little better situations in the sense that the data are usually not so clustered .
They are scattered because you have substrate concentration on both the axis and therefore you get a much better fit .
Similar profile an alternative profile is Eadie Hofste plot .
Another version of the linear form of Michaelis Menten equation where you can arrive at v0 = vm - km / s.v0 If you plot such an equation and that you can obtain by multiplying the Lineweaver equation by v0.vm on both the sides and then you get a straight line with negative slope where slope is - km .
The axis here is v0 / s versus v0 .
You get a slope of - km and the intercept on the y axis is vm itself .
This also has the advantage of almost well scattered or data points that can be easily used .
Now in all the three linear plots which I have discussed that is Lineweaver plot , Eadie Hofste plot as well as the Hanes plot again there is one limitation which has been noticed .
We have no means to look at the adequacy or the effectiveness of our analytical procedure which we have used .
After all the accuracy of our determination or analysis of experimental data will largely depend upon the accuracy of our experimental methods and whatever data point you get we can always make a statistical fit to form a straight line and get the values .
We don ’ t get any insight into the correctness of the data .
To take care of that another important plot was proposed in 1974 by Cornish and Bowden .
This had the characteristic feature in the sense that if you write the Michaelis Menten equation assuming the substrate concentration and the initial reaction velocity as constants and km and vm as variables although it is little unusual and unrealistic but just for the sake of a mathematical analysis if we write that , we can write for example 1 / v0 = km + S / vm.S If you just take a reciprocal vm / v0 = km + S / S vm = v0 ( 1 + km / s ) We have just written the equation in the form of vm and km as variables .
vm and km also represent a straight line with a slope of 1 / s and intercept of v0 .
It may look little unorthodox and because km and vm we know are constants .
At a constant enzyme concentration vm is also constant .
If we consider a single data point that means at any given point of S1 , we consider v1 .
Another set of conditions S2 we consider v2 .
For each of these two data points a straight line relationship between km and vm must be valid at least from the mathematical point of view .
So what we do is in this case therefore for each set of data point between S and v we develop a straight line .
That means we simulate the value of v .
We just assumed the hypothetical value of km , corresponding vm is calculated in a table and we draw a straight line with reference to let us say S1V1 .
Similar exercise we do for the second data point we also develop another expression , another straight line and this gives you let us say for S2 v2 .
Third point we also develop S3 v3 .
So for each data point we can develop a straight line .
In the enzyme system the reaction will have only one set of km and vm and that will be the one which is obtained by intersection of these straight line relations and that gives you a perfect check on your experimental data .
Very often you notice that in experimental data you may not get a perfect point of intersection .
The point may let us say go something like this .
Then you are sure in one thing that your km and vm values are somewhere in this range .
You know the range of km and vm values not the absolute value and you also know the limitations of your experimental methods that you are following .
There is some where something flaw because theoretically if all your data points or measurements or substrate concentration or reaction velocity are perfect they must intersect at each other assuming that Michaelis Menten kinetics is valid .
Cornish Bowden plot gives you a possibility not only to get the range of km and vm values but also makes a check on the validity or accuracy of your experimental data and which is probably one of the very basic features in the case of enzyme kinetics that your experimental data must be pretty accurate to be able to analyze the kinetics of enzyme catalyzed reaction .
Using either of these plots , personally I recommend you Cornish Bowden plot , for any analyses .
We must be able to analyze or get the kinetic features or characteristics of any enzyme catalyzed reaction broadly in terms of the value of k2 that is what we call as turn over number and vm and km value .
There is another very interesting feature as far as the Michaelis Menten equation is concerned .
When we mentioned our assumptions of Michaelis Menten equation , you will notice that these assumptions will largely not fit into most of the actual enzyme catalyzed reactions .
But Michaelis Menten equation is still considered to be the universal model for analyzing the enzyme catalyzed reactions .
There is some where some compromise .
If you look at each of the points where we have paradoxes in terms of the actual enzyme catalyzed reaction and those which can be done by Michaelis Menten kinetics , the first one that the Michaelis Menten kinetics deals with is the single substrate enzyme catalyzed reaction .
With the background in the biochemical metabolics you will appreciate that most of the enzyme catalyzed reactions in practice in the living cells are not single substrate reactions .
They are multisubtrate .
At least two substrate reactions and if not any other directly converting substrate water is a molecule which participates in the reaction .
Now in such cases the applicability of Michaelis Menten equation is still valid under conditions that one of the substrate is held at a constant concentration which is in excess and one substrate which is limiting .
The Michaelis Menten kinetics should be applied to a limiting substrate and the other substrate must be in excess and therefore its concentration can be considered to be constant .
Even after it is consumed partly the concentration drop is not very large and actually if we look into most of the hydrolytic reactions the water which is almost more than fifteen molar concentration in the reaction mixture , even after participation of water in the hydrolytic reaction , the concentration doesn ’ t drop to significant level and therefore Michaelis Menten kinetics is still valid and gives you on analysis practical results .
The significance of Michaelis Menten equation is that it assumes one substrate binding site per enzyme molecule .
When we wrote mechanistic expression for enzyme substrate binding , we are taking one substrate molecule which binds towards enzyme molecule thereby assuming that the enzyme possesses only one substrate binding site which is also not true in many cases .
Most of the enzymes , particularly the ones which have quaternary structure for their function , they will have more than one binding site on the enzyme molecule .
But such a fallacy can be taken care in the light of Michaelis Menten kinetics .
If the binding sites even if they are more than one , if they are not interactive that means they are independent of each other and do not interfere in binding of each other , then Michaelis Menten kinetics will be valid .
The only difference will be that we must take in account multiple binding sites in terms of concentration of enzyme .
That means concentration of enzyme will reflect the concentration of active sites .
The third is we have talked about the formation of single intermediate complex .
When we say enzyme substrate complex is formed we are talking of only one enzyme substrate complex that is formed .
In many cases even which are now practically understood very clearly this is not true .
Very often we end up with kind of interactions as E + S ES ET E + P There are a variety of intermediate complexes that are formed not only one complex .
This is very true very often in the case of reversible reactions and in such cases the Michaelis Menten kinetics will also be valid provided the interconversions of the intermediate complexes are the rate limiting step .
We just simply consider these the irreversible process .
This is k1 , k - 1 , k2 and k3 .
You must identify the rate limiting step and put the rate constant k2 that appears in Michaelis Menten kinetics as one which is the rate limiting step and then Michaelis Menten kinetics will apply to it .
Most of the enzyme catalyzed reactions involve more than one intermediate complex .
Now the Michaelis Menten kinetics can still apply to those reactions provided the inter conversion of the complexes is assumed to be the rate limiting step .
Or in other words in place of turn over number k2 that appear in the case of Michaelis Menten kinetics you put the rate limiting rate constant in this sequence of interaction in the enzyme substrate or in the enzyme kinetics and that will still be valid .
Related to the same issue of multiple intermediate complexes is turn over number which may involve several individual rate constant .
We often define our turn over number vm = k2 [ E ] 0 and this k2 is defined as the turn over number .
In most of the enzyme catalyzed reactions which involve multiple intermediates , a single rate constant may not able to define the turn over number .
Turn over number may work out to be a lump parameter consisting of more than one rate constant .
Just for example you consider a very practical case which has been studied extensively like ……… catalyzed hydrolysis of esters and amides and if we look at reaction sequence which it follows today E + S ES EAc E + P This is k1 , k - 1 , k2 .
Another product is formed .
This is P2 .
This is P1 .
There are two products formed on hydrolysis , acid as well as alcohol and this is your k3 .
If you just analyze this steady state hypothesis with respect EAc which is acylated enzyme complex you get the reaction velocity as v0 = E0.S .
k2 k3 / k2 + k3 In fact just assume when we will proceed further we will develop a system by which we can write the expression for more complicated kinetics because when we write for a single enzyme substrate complex developing the steady state rate expression is very simple .
As you reach more complexity in terms of more enzyme substrate complexes the mathematical analysis becomes more and more complex and there are routes by which one can write straight away by observation the rate expression and we will discuss that in the subsequence classes .
E0.S . k2 k3 / k2 + k3 v0 = { ( k - 1 / k1 ) / k2 + k3 } + S Here in such a case k catalytic in analogy to the original Michaelis Menten hypothesis will be equivalent to Kcat = k2k3 / k2 + k3 Not a simple k2 , the turn over number will depend upon both the parameters k2 as well as k3 and that is another fallacy which is built in the Michaelis Menten kinetics .
It doesn ’ t take care of that .
So the Michaelis Menten kinetics need to be extended to develop a rate expression which takes into account steady state with respect to one of the intermediates and analyze it in analogy to develop a lump parameter for defining the turn over number .
But turn over number for most of the enzyme catalyzed reaction varies in the order from 10 - 104 per second .
That is the order which it goes and it is a fairly large range .
So that also dictates that there are certain reactions which are slow there are certain reactions which are very fast .
A reaction with a turn over number of 104per second means so many numbers of molecules of substrate is converted to product per mole of the enzyme which is a very large turn over number as against a turn over number of ten .
The next and very significant advantage of Michaelis Menten kinetics and particularly the significance of the km , Michaelis Menten constant , is very often we get an insight into the functioning of enzymes in the living cell .
Take the simplest example of glucose - 1 - phosphate .
Glucose is the starting point when we go into the metabolics and its first step is phosporylation of glucose and you get a series of products glucose - 1 - phosphate , glucose - 6 - phosphate or fructose - 1 - phosphate and so on .
These molecules can go further either into the glycogen synthesis as a storage molecule or further to fructose biphosphate .
The route which these molecules will follow will depend on the relative km value of the two enzymes involved .
The km value for the fructose biphosphate forming enzyme is much , much smaller at least thousand folds smaller than the glycogen synthesizing route .
Therefore as long as the concentration of these molecules , phosporylated glucose , is not very high it will always tend to go to the fructose biphosphate route and release the energy .
Only when the concentration of this phosporylated glucose becomes quiet high , a part of it , depending upon the ratio of the km value will go to glycogen synthesis .
That is one simple example but at many points where the substrate has more than one routes to follow in the biochemical metabolics its preference or the likely physiological route can be decided on the basis of km value and that has been possible based on the understanding of Michaelis Menten kinetics .
Another important significance of the Michaelis Menten kinetics is its application to assay of the enzymes .
One of the analytical advantage is very often we are required to estimate the activity of an enzyme sample .
These enzyme sample activity must depend upon the effect of enzyme concentration on the reaction velocity and we use such a parameter particularly when we plot the concentration of enzyme on the reaction velocity .
We get a profile .
Initially it is a straight line which is linear and then it tapers off towards the end when the enzyme concentration becomes high .
Normally we assay the enzyme concentration in the linear range .
There are two parameters , two constraints which have to be strictly …. .. when we talk of assay of the enzyme .
There are three constraints .
The first constraint is the detection of the product .
You must have a method for the detection of the product formed of the reaction .
The minimum quantity of product you can detect will dictate the time of the reaction .
The time required for the reaction to be carried out will be considered on the basis of the detection method of the product so that you can accurately determine the product .
The second limitation is that you must follow the linear range of enzyme reaction velocity profile .
The third parameter is one must ensure the substrate concentration for assay of the enzyme .
And for all analytical purposes , the substrate concentration that is taken is much , much larger than enzyme concentration .
For all practical purposes the reaction velocity what we measure is v0 vmax That means the substrate concentration is very , very large and as I mentioned that we can never reach effectively to vm .
We can only approach to vm and for all practical purposes the substrate concentration that is chosen is roughly of order of about greater or equal to hundred km values .
So the magnitude of km , the magnitude of Michaelis Menten constant , also gives you a parameter for assay of the enzyme so that you can choose your substrate concentration for carrying out the experiments .
That is another major significance of the Michaelis Menten kinetics .
Another important feature of Michaelis Menten kinetics is to define specificity constant .
If suppose we have an enzyme acting on more than one substrate .
How to define its specificity or compare specificity of the enzyme with respect to different substrates ?
The kinetic parameter available from Michaelis Menten kinetics can give you some insight into this .
At a very low substrate concentration , when substrate concentration is much , much smaller than km then your initial reaction velocity will be equal to v0 = k2 E0 S / km A first order kinetics , with k2 E0 / km as a pseudo first order rate constant kf .
If you consider E0 as a variable then k2 / km is a constant which is considered as specificity constant .
Sometimes some people call it as pseudo second order rate constant considering enzyme also as one of the reactant which is not really a second order rate constant .
k2 / km considered as a specificity constant will determine the relative specificity of an enzyme to different substrate .
One can determine these values from the kinetic analysis and one can get the picture of specificity .
Under this first order design or under condition of S0 &lt ; &lt ; km there is another feature which we must look at .
At this feature E0 is approximately equal to E , the initial enzyme concentration .
We are assuming that the substrate concentration is very low .
We can also go to a level that not all the enzyme is saturated ; all the enzyme is not bound , bulk of the enzyme is still available in the free form .
Therefore the specificity constant relates initial reaction velocity to the concentration of free enzyme rather than the total enzyme .
So these are some of the practical implications of the significance of Michaelis Menten kinetics which applies to most of the kinetic analysis .
One of the most important features is to test the validity of steady state assumption .
We have been always assuming that Briggs and Haldane gave it .
The steady state hypothesis have undergone very severe tests both analytical as well as experimental and it has proved those tests and that ’ s why it has become so much universally valid today .
How to analyze or what are the experimental constraints within which the steady state hypothesis must be considered valid ?
That you can very easily arrive at , if you write down the rate expression for rate of change of enzyme substrate complex for example if you look at your original equation that we discussed E + S X E + P If we consider the original equation that we mentioned earlier , we wrote the rate of change of concentration of X .
I am again not writing the parenthesis but the capital letters denote the concentration terms .
They can be written as k1 , k - 1 , k2 .
dx / dt = k1E S – k - 1x - k2x = k1 [ E0 - X ] S – k - 1x – k2x Now you can separate the variables x and t in this equation and ultimately therefore you can write ?
dx = ?
dt k1E0 S – ( k1S + k - 1 + k2 ) X If you just solve it you will get a logarithmic term and the solution will be ln [ k1E0S - ( k1S + k - 1 + k2 ) x ] = t + a - ( k1S + k - 1 + k2 ) Let us say alpha is the constant for integration .
This alpha can be easily determined at t = 0and x = 0 .
At initial time there will be no enzyme substrate complex and that can give you simply the value of alpha as a = ln ( k1E0S ) / ( - k1S + k - 1 + k2 ) So now you substitute the value of alpha and there by get your final solution to the two integrals and if you take exponential on both the sides and simplify you will come out with an expression v = k2 x and v can be developed and with just two three iterations in between you will arrive at v = k2x = vmS { 1 - exp [ - ( k1S + k - 1 + k2 ) t ] / km + S In this exponential term if we consider that t is very small that means right from the beginning of the reaction the steady state hypothesis is not valid .
If the reaction has to progress to an extent that the t gets a magnitude and the exponential term tend to go towards zero .
If the t becomes large now the required size of the t will depend upon the magnitude of ( k1S + k - 1 + k2 ) .
The magnitude of this parameter dictates what should be the size of the t .
Or in other words this t is nothing else but the induction phase after which the reaction measurements should be made so that steady state hypothesis is valid .
For all practical purposes by rapid mixing techniques people have been able to analyze and determine the value of k - 1 , k1 and k2 a reasonable value .
Particularly if you assume k2 as the turn over number and we mentioned that the value ranges from 10 - 104 .
A reasonable magnitude of this will be let us say about thousand per second and even at this thousand per second the exponential of course at time equal to let us say five minutes or three hundred seconds the magnitude of this exponential will be less than .01 .
A very , very small quantity and then the rate expression will turn up into the Michaelis Menten kinetics .
v0 = vm S / km + S That means the magnitude of this exponential is negligible .
This magnitude will depend on two factors one is turn over number and as we already know that turn over number of these reactions is pretty high , orders of magnitude of few thousand .
Only then it depends on the magnitude of time .
If you take a reasonable time then the multiplication of turn over number or rather not exactly turn over number but sum total of ( k1S + k - 1 + k2 ) , out of which only one factor is turn over number , that magnitude if it becomes large enough so that the exponential of it ’ s negative is approaching zero , our system will turn up into a Michaelis Menten expression .
So the constraints for the applicability of Michaelis Menten hypothesis particularly steady state hypothesis will be valid in case when we take a reasonable time period and also the turn over number is high .
In most of the practical cases where the reactions have been studied the two parameters have been found to be valid and that gives validity to the steady state hypothesis for all practical purposes .
Also in many of the critical situations where the assumptions of the enzyme catalyzed reactions were not valid strictly under certain set of condition the Michaelis Menten kinetics could be considered to be applicable .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
In the last lecture we were discussing about gel permeation chromatography , and then about mass spectroscopy for determining polymer molecular weights .
And with that we came to end of the discussion of how to determine polymer molecular weight .
Today we will move to a different topic , which is Structural Analysis of Polymers by Spectroscopic Method .
Now , we have in the beginning of this lecture series , we knew or we found out how to synthesize polymers by different process .
And then and next set of lectures we found how to characterize the polymers in solution , including the how to determine the molecular weight of the polymers .
Now , we will know whether the polymer , what is the polymers we have made , so in this chemical structure analysis we will be basically discussing , mainly this spectroscopic techniques , by which we will be analyzing the chemical structures including the microstructures of polymer molecules .
And out of this listed spectroscopic method , we will mainly discuss the NMR techniques to use up the NMR techniques mainly and we will briefly mention about UV visible , and IR spectroscopy , and we have discussed mass spectroscopy in the last class .
So , it is very critical when we make that , we now we know how to make this polymers , and what is the molecular weight of the polymers we made .
Now , obviously we need to know whether , we have made the right polymer , you know we may be have something particular in mind , in terms of chemical structures , in terms of end groups of the polymer and if you are making copolymer .
Then the microstructures of copolymers , the composition , the series , the sequence of the monomers by which the copolymer is made , so the all these are important .
So , we must know before going to further , to do know the property or to determine the property of these polymers which we made , you must know what is actually the chemical structure of the polymers .
So , it is very important crucial to know you know the repeat units , we may have used a particular monomer , whether that monomer exist in the same form as repeat unit we need to find out ; what is the end group of that polymer , what is the molecular microstructure in terms of homopolymer ?
For example , the tacticity whether it is seen that syndiotactic , atactic or isotactic , and then chemically compositions of the of a copolymer , the mole fraction of the repeat unit , the sequence of the different repeat units in a copolymer .
And spectroscopy is a most powerful method , which we can utilize to get this structure analysis done .
Now , what will do with in this lecture , we briefly talk about the interaction of the electromagnetic radiation , the basis of spectroscopy , interaction of electromagnetic radiation with maters in this case polymers .
This is you all of us know , the electromagnetic radiation , and this is the increasing wavelength , so this is left hand side is increasing frequency , which makes this increasing energy , and this is a short wavelength it can penetrate atom , so we can study extra refraction using x - rays here .
Next is a little higher wavelength or little less energy is the UV visible , UV visible spectrum , where we mainly mainly mainly prove the electronic transitions of a molecules .
And then using IR , impetrate spectra we can prove the molecular vibration and finally , with radio frequency radiation , we can use this radio frequency in NMR technique to know the chemical structure of the polymer molecules .
So , basically matter can interact two three ways , with the radiation it can absorb , and intensity when it absorb , intensity can change from I 0 to o I , so you can plot transmission or the absorbance versus wavelength , and to find out we at which wavelength it is absorbing maximum , and what is criteria and so on .
emission spectra light it when we sign a light in a sample , it can absorb and then it can emit emit , may be in the same wavelength or different wavelength , and with the help of detector we can get a get the intensity of this emitted radiation .
And the different type of emission spectra we can use fluorescence , emission from excited electronic single states , phosphorescence , emissions from excited electronic triplet states .
The other type of interaction is scattering , and optical rotation , the sample might change the rotational rotation or polarization of the sample causing change in optical rotation of the light .
In in a basically , very same manner how this equipments are done , light sources there is a light source , and there is a frequency selector , which basically select a single frequency or you can have the entire light in that particular region of interest pass through this .
And it is the sample , and then you can detect the transmission transmitted light of the emitted light using detectors , and then you get the information about the sample from absorption spectra , emission spectra or a scattering like Raman scattering .
Now , come to UV - visible spectroscopy or just talk about in this course , we are not going into details about this spectroscopic techniques , because these are very basic techniques ; what I will just mention basic few basic like points , and then tell you what is the application of this particular spectroscopy in terms of polymer characterization .
So , in terms UV - visible , basics of UV - visible spectra , it is basically electronic transitions from the highest occupied molecular orbital to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital , homo and LUMO .
Then nonbonding electrons , molecular orbital sometimes if the nonbonding molecular weight are the highest orbitals , occupied then the electronic transition may happen from nonbonding molecular orbital to lowest unoccupied molecular orbital .
So , for molecules which have only sigma orbital , mainly sigma orbital , then homo LUMO transition happens between sigma and sigma star , which is of quite high energy and not having very practical interest .
If there is a pi bond in the compound or a molecule and specially , if the pi bond there are many pi bonds which are pi orbitals or pi bonds which are conjugated , then the pi pi transitions , transitions are of like UV - visible range , and the mole conjugation , mole it goes to visible range , and higher wavelength .
And this is having great practical significance which helps us to find out the group , functional groups or the conjugation present in the molecule .
And non - bonding end to , and non - bonding pi star are very weak very weak absorption , which happens in this region 200 nanometer to 400 nanometer , which , so basically implies presence of nonbonding electron in the compound .
So , how this UV spectroscopy is applied in polymer science , in characterization of polymers basically , it is like the how the UV spectroscopy is applied to in for the small molecules for example , it helps in detection of particular homophobes , which been light absorbing group present in a molecules .
And if we have groups like , acrylic acids , methacrylic acids or styrenic , which have a strong absorption , then this this this type of polymers actually help us in detecting the trace amount of residual monomers ; if the monomers are present , then it will give us from UV signal , UV - visible absorption signal for that monomers .
And obviously , here that the UV visible absorption spectra for the monomers , and for the peaks of the monomers and the polymers will be different , so we can follow the monomer peaks , and to find out the conversion during the polymerization .
If one the , in the copolymer , if one of the polymers you know the two monomers they have a different UV spectra , UV - visible spectra , then we can follow their , we can isolate their polymer after the polymerization is over from the polymerization medium , then we can get the composition simply by studying the UV spectra , UV - visible spectra of the polymers .
For that of course , we need to know the absorption behavior of the individual homopolymer , like in this case called polybutadiene , and the polystyrene .
If we know the individual UV visible spectra , absorption spectra for polybutadiene , and polystyrene homopolymer , then from there we can easily get the composition of polybutadiene - co - styrene .
We can use as we discussed in the case of GPC technique , we can use UV visible detector to find out the molar mass distribution , and we can get spectra , we can detector we can get the GPC , molar mass distribution .
And of course , as the pi bonds you know , the conjugation pi bonds , the more the conjugation the higher is the absorption , so I following the conjugate sequence of pi bonds , we can follow the conversion of polyacrylonitrile fiber into carbon fibers .
So , these are some of the examples of UV visible spectroscopy in polymers .
And next , we will move there are few more examples like dyes , sometimes we use dyes in a polymers for carbonation .
So , we can analyze the amount of dyes present , we can also analyze specialized additives which are , where the additives are UV visible active .
So , basically , we can use this sort of , we can use UV visible spectroscopy for this sort of use in polymer science .
So , next move to the IR spectroscopy , and as I mentioned , we will just mention the basic things about the spectroscopy , and then move to the application polymer science .
Now , as we all know that IR spectroscopy are mainly used in functional group determination , and it is basically , a transition between in different fiber , vibration states of a molecules .
And this energy gap between the vibrational states such that , that it it resonate with the electromagnetic radiation about , having wavelength of 1 micron to 15 micron .
So , typically we run IR spectra from say 4000 centimeter inverse to 400 centimeter inverse , and for a non - linear molecules there are n atomic , if the molecule have n atom , the numbers vibrations is 3 n minus 6 , so you can imagine for a polymer molecules which have large number of atoms .
So , many numbers of vibrations are possible , and each have a individual individual absorption in that higher region , so the higher spectra of polymers have lot of this absorption bands , and it is impossible very difficult to assign for a particular reason , or particular vibration , for all the absorption peaks in IR spectra for a polymer .
But , obviously , that does not restrict us to use highest technique to polymer characterization , because the functional groups present in a in a molecule , it may be in the polymer as well , they do not change the absorption the absorption in IR whether , it is present in a small molecule or a large polymer molecule .
So , what happen if we found those particular vibration bands or IR peaks , then we know the , we can assure the presence of those particular functional groups in the polymer , which help us to characterize the polymer molecules .
So , as we know that there are a different types of vibrations possible like stretching and bending , and this is important that interaction of matter with IR radiation offers only when this vibrations produces a change in hyper movement .
So , it happens , so the higher spectra , higher absorption happen only for the vibrations or bending vibrations for polar bonds .
And this is the chart or carton gives , typically the range where this IR absorption happen for a particular bond vibrations , like range , N H , in this range , see triple bond in then comes this say C over double bonds comes around here .
So , this is basically a guideline for where the peaks come for a corresponding to functional group , polar bonds show strong absorption that IR frequency generally , and intensity shape and the position of this IR bands are typically used to identify the type of absorption .
This is example of H 2 I x spectra for this particular polymer , and this is like this is a particular bond for NH 3 , NH stretching , this is for CH stretching and so on .
So , this the IR spectra , for it is not very special in the sense , that it is same as the that the use of IR in detecting the chemical chemical structure of polymer molecules is similar to the application of IR for small organic molecules .
It basically , help us to determine the presence of functional groups in polymer molecules .
So , what we will do , we will go next to NMR mass spectroscopy , and now as this all of you may be knowing that NMR is about transition between magnetic energy levels , so few thumb rules like , if the molecules is NMR or a nuclear is NMR active , if the spin number I is not equal to 0 , if it is 0 then it is a it is not a NMR active .
And there few general thumb rules , if the atomic mass if the atomic number are both given then I is 0 , so they are NMR inactive the atomic mass is given , atomic number is odd , then it is I s whole integer , and all nuclei having odd atomic mass , they have a half integers , so like proton , carbon 13 they all have I value of half .
Now , they can they can in general term rule of thumb is that , if the I is I has some value than 2 n plus 1 is the numbers of states , they can basically , they have the number of states levels , energy levels , magnetic energy levels .
So , if for a proton I is half , so it can have 2 into half plus 1 , which makes it two different energy levels , which is basically we call this is minus half and plus half .
So , what happened , in terms of pictorial representation and this for a proton molecule , this pins are randomly oriented , when there is no external magnetic field , now in the absence of any external magnetic field , these are randomly oriented .
Now , if there is external magnetic field applied to the molecule , then they can align in two different way , they can align with the external magnetic field or they can align against the magnetic field ; now there is two states or energy different where this is having higher energy , then this , so this lower energy and this is half energy , less than higher energy .
So , in presence of external magnetic field , the nuclei can have two different energy state and now if we apply a nuclear magnetic radiation , whose energy is in this in this gap , in this range .
Then sum of the spin , some of the nuclei from this lower energy level , can move to the higher energy level by absorbing the nuclei magnetic radiation .
With increasing external energy , external magnetic field , the energy between the two state increases , and with increasing in the difference between the two energy states , the population is in the lower state which is ground state , becomes more and more compared to the higher states .
So , if we have higher magnetic field , there will be more number of molecules or nuclei in the lower state , then higher state , so when you have a nuclear magnetic radiation coming , the more number of nuclei can move to the higher higher state causing absorption .
So , with increasing in external field , the intensity of absorption always go up , and the sensitivity of the instrument , of the of the measurements goes up .
Now , this is we know that in a molecule , in a molecule not every nuclei experience same amount of field basically , in surrounding a nucleus there is there are electron clouds , which basically seals some of the external magnetic field applied .
And the more the shielding , more is the effective ; less is the effective external magnetic field the nuclei experience .
So , with the change in the chemical environment around nuclei , the effective magnetic field the nuclei experience will change , and hence the radiation the lambda at which it absorbs .
So , if you compare in a in a standard different groups , in case of in case we are talking about hydrogen atom proton , now this protons will have chemical environment , so they will have experience of a different magnetic field ; so the resonance resonance energy will be different .
Now , by though they are very small they can resolved , and so they can be put in a scale , so from the enormous spectra we can get idea about the chemical environment of the of the proton here .
So , the more shielded it has higher delta , lower delta H value , and if it is deshielded , then it is a higher delta H value , now this probably known to you , so I am not spending too much time on this .
There are , this may be also known , but let me complete when you observe a NMR spectra , what does it mean the number of signals or peaks we see in NMR spectra , it means that is the number of equivalent groups of protons or carbon , if you are talking about carbon .
So , then spectra NMR spectra , then we are talking about that many number of that many number of equivalent groups of protons present in the molecules ; the chemical shift of the delta H value will give the idea , what type of idea , what type of chemical environment , so what type of group .
So , what type of proton or carbon they are , intensity of the signals will be proportional to the number of protons or carbons contributing to a signal , so obviously , the signal from two protons will be double than the signal from one proton .
The signals can have splitting which gives the idea about the neighbors , and the line shape whether it is a sharp , or it is broad it gives idea about the interaction of the solvent .
More sophisticated NMR techniques like , relaxation time in a way , they give idea or information about dynamics of a molecule .
So , in case of polymers , we apply lectures in time , if we get the relaxation time , then we can get the information about polymer dynamics , and we gets information about pressure went off atoms .
Now , this is interesting in terms of how we apply NMR spectroscopy for polymer science , the discussion about , last few minutes about NMR spectroscopy is about general , which applied to any organic chemistry or any other science NMR , any other course .
But this is specific to polymer science or polymer chemistry where we apply NMR for identifying the chemical structure , composition and microstructure ; obviously , the first one is the identification of polymers , and functional group , and this is same as the way we identify the organic molecules from NMR spectra and functional groups , so this is this is not made from the chemicals shift .
And the intensity , and the coupling values we can get information about the polymer , and the functional groups .
Obviously , we know which are the monomers we have used for making the polymers , so we have a priory some idea about the NMR spectra , so basically , this confirms that the polymerization has taken place .
Obviously , the NMR spectra for the monomer will be different , then it specially different than the polymers for example , if you have vinyl , any vinyl molecules .
So , with polymerization the double bond will be absent , so with progress , with falling intensity of the double bonds and protons in that C C double bond , we can follow the polymerization process .
We will just give a example in a minute to elaborate more on that , composition if you are talking about say copolymer between A and B , we will be able to find out using NMR how much A , and how much B , in the final polymer what is type of chain structure , whether it is random or it is alternating or it is a block .
Nature of copolymer ; that is able to we will be able to find out using NMR spectra for a homopolymer , we can get idea about the tacticity , and also if we apply some chemical reaction or if we can find out the end group ; we can get information about the end group present in the polymer .
Now , let us discuss few examples , now this is a NMR spectra , proton NMR spectra form PMMA , this is one example , one PMMA not every PMMA in the lab or plant should look like this ; but it is one example , one PMMA made in the lab , this is the proton spectra of that particular PMMA sample .
Now , this obviously , this shows that the , this is for O methoxy group O methoxy group , and this peaks up for alpha methyl group this one and these two protons are given by here , Now , this alpha , the protons from alpha methyl groups they will have different chemical shift , depending upon the special arrangement of the next carbon for example , if the next carbon here this particular one , if we draw this in explain little bit here .
Now , here it can have two special arrangements , one it can have like CH 3 , and so in this case we as we discussed in terms of copolymerization .
This is one arrangement and you can have same here , and now this is a arrangement which is alternating here , and this is two carbon have alternating stereochemistry , so this is a tryad , this is a t over tryad , and their arrangement is r r , racemic .
And this case , it is if I talk about this thing , they will be different , so all these three arrangement r r , m r and m n they will have different chemical shift .
And from this particular sample it is seen that it is seen that , if you go back and look at that NMR spectra in the computer screen , this this r r is the maximum compared to the other two other two signal .
So , if you compare under this curve which is nothing but the intensity of those signal it comes out approximately 65 percent , and this is 32 percent , and this is 3 percent , which shows that this synthesize PMMA is predominantly a syndiotactic PMMA , if you have this m n groups maximum , then you would have isotactic PMMA maximum Now , let us this is a spectrum for a copolymer of MMA and styrene , so this is a copolymer of copolymer of styrene and MMA , Methyl methacrylate .
Now , if you look at this sub NMR of this particular compound , this three proton peaks are for the 5 hydrometric hydrogen of the styrene , is so this 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 this , they are 5 hydrogen , for this 5 hydrogen automatic .
These 3 peaks , 1 , 2 , 3 for this O methoxy protons , for this O methoxy group , and they also not same depending upon whether , they are syndiotatctic or hydrostatic or a isotactic , they are chemical shift value will defer .
This is for your alpha CH 3 of the PMMA group , and these peaks are these 3 carbon atom from polystyrene backbone , and this took hydrogen from the PMMA background .
So , what does this spectra help us , this spectra can give us the idea about the composition , for example , if we talk about this 5 hydrogen see , if I consider just consider that you have one styrene molecule , one styrene one styrenic unit rather in the polymer background , so it have 5 hydrogen now the integration corresponded to this is 1.00 , so this is 1.00 for 5 hydrogen .
So , 1 hydrogen give me , this means 1 hydrogen corresponds to 0.2 integration , so if you consider now this alpha CH 3 this is from 3 proton for the NMR it is , now the integration for this 2.5457 .
So , if 1 hydrogen corresponds to 0.22 , 0.57 integration will corresponds to 12.85 multiplied this by 5 you will get 12.85 , so this is the number of protons .
Now , each MMA each MMA munity will have 3 hydrogen , so how many MMA munity , if you divided if you divide 12.85 by 3 which is 4 2 8 around 4.28 munity of MMA .
So , in this spectra corresponds to 1 styrenic munity , and 4 point may be about 4.28 MMA munity , which means the composition percentage of MMA is 4.28 1 plus 4.28 into 100 , which gives around 81 .
So , from this is one example that using the proton NMR spectra , you can actually get the information about this , the composition of the copolymer .
Now , obviously , to do this exercise you have to identify peaks , which are correspondence to particularly 1 munity for example , this one we had for the styrene munity this one for this PMMA munity .
And also we need to very careful about that we have to run as many as can in the NMR as possible , this spectra more quantitative the lesser , the number of scam the error the more will be error in the in the composition .
So , from this example where we can find out the composition of the copolymer , and what is the copolymer in this case it is , it can be seen it is more of course , syndiotacttic copolymer .
Next example is , this is we are tying to we made a block copolymer of poly tertiary butylacrolate , and polystyrene using living radical polymerization raft , so this is the monomer .
First this is the reaction scheme this is the monomer tertiary , and it was reacted with this , it is underground radical polymerization by AIBN in range of heat , in presence of this gel transformation , and you have this first or first block .
So , this is a block of tertiary , butyl , acolyte there should be two ends here to represent this is unit , now from this what we can do , we can get the molecular weight of the first block , and then when we react with a another monomer this case styrene , then we can make a block copolymer , this is also present in this side .
So , we have this is the way we synthesized a block copolymer of this and polystyrene , so from this the NMR structure of this we can get the molecular weight of the first block , and from the NMR of the proton NMR of this second we can get the composition of polystyrene and poly tertiary applied , and obviously , from that we can get , the length block length of the second block as well , how ?
This is the example , the spectra for the first block , which is the tertiary block , the block of tertiary butylacrolate ; now this this peaks corresponding to this 4 aromatic protons , so you cannot see properly .
But , it comes around total 4 hydrogen comes around 1 1 , so this corresponds to 4 hydrogen of 4 aromatic protons .
Now , this 0.53 this 0.53 , this 0.53 is from the 3 hydrogen , this 3 hydrogen of the polymer , poly butylacrolate blocks that corresponds to 3 hydrogen hydrogens from poly butylacrolate block .
Now , if 4 hydrogen corresponds to 1 1 , then how many hydrogen it should correspond to 0.11 divided by 4 multiplied by 0.53 , so this is the number of protons , for that particular signal .
So , that the number of tertiary , butylacrolate munities in the first block in the first block is by 4 divided by divide by 3 , 4 hydrogen corresponds to 1 , so 1 hydrogen corresponds to there may be a mistake I am making here , so this could be fine .
So , what I may be , the calculation may be something may be little different , but what you understand what you know that , if you consider this R from , this four aromatic protons , and this form this three protons from tertiary , butylacrolate munities , then obviously , you can find out from the intensity ratios .
How many protons are there , and from that how many tertiary , butylacrolate groups , and from that you can get the molecular weight of the first block simple .
And look at these peaks , this are for the these 3 hydrogen present here in the monomer 1 , 2 , 3 and 1 , 2 , 3 , 3 peaks for the polymer 3 olefinic hydrogen present in the monomer .
So , if you had the ratio from the ratio of the peaks of this corresponds to 3 protons for the monomer and this correspondence , and this corresponds to the 3 protons of the polymer , so from this ratio , you can find out what is the conversion of monomer into polymer .
So , obviously , with more and more time the reaction goes , this will come down and this will go up as the molecular weight also goes up , so this means that not only using proton proton NMR spectra we can get the molecular weight of the first polymer , but also we can monitor the this is a spectra from fluid sample .
So , we can monitor the amount of conversion of monomer into polymer with time , so basically we can do a kinetic study of kinetic study of the polymerization process .
Now , once you isolate the pure monomer first block , and then add to the , and then reacted with the styrene molecule we get this block copolymer ; obviously , from the ratio .
Now , this if you this is a longer longer chain , so obviously , you can ignore this four aromatic compounds compare to the number of aromatic protons present in the styrene .
So , you can assume that all the aromatic protons peaks are from this 5 styrenic munities , whereas , this particular peaks are from the 3 hydrogen ’ s from tertiary butylacrolate munity , and for styrenic munity .
So , from the ratio of these two , you can now find out what is the moral ratio of the styrenic munity and the tertiary butylacrolate munity , and you already know the molecular rate of the tertiary butyl munity , so obviously , now you can find out the molecular weight of the styrene munity or styrene block as well .
So , with this is the example where we showed that using proton NMR , you get the molecular weight , and obviously , you need a end group type , which is specific pick for end group it was the styrenic peak , which were available to determination .
So , not only we can find out the molecular weight , we can find out the conversion from monomer to polymer , and also if we add the second monomer to form a block , then we can get the information about the composition of the block , as well as the length of the all the molecular weight of individual block .
So , this is example where we showed that the proton NMR can be useful to get information about polymer microstructure .
Now , let give , let us give few examples where we talk about carbon 13 NMR , can be used to quantify and identify the polymers .
Let us take a example of polycarbonate , we know we have seen during our first few lectures , this is the way we make polycarbonate , this final a is reacted with a carbonate source , so this is the structure of polycarbonate .
Now , from a carbon 13 NMR spectra , we can assign each individual carbons in this polycarbonate and this is this is the special A , this carbon this carbon from the carbonate peak is special , because with help of this spectra we can find out the composition of a copolymer , which will show as a example in the new next slide .
So , this is a example of co - polycarbonate which is consist of DPA , and the other compound TNB time , we are talking about , now this carbonate peak we call this A and this A , so this particular is from , if this is if the copolymer have two , this final A group making A carbonate linkage , which we can get information from the disfinal polycarbonate homopolymer .
So , we can assign this polymer A from polycarbonate DPA homopolymer , similarly we can make a homopolymer of this particular monomer , there we can know what is the chemical shift for this carbon C 13 peak for this particular carbonate .
So , when you have copolymer from the ratio of the three , these three peaks , the amount of this type of carbonate present in the system , so if you these are the example for this copolymer made from this two processes .
So , in case of in case of a , say if you are having a 50 : 50 mixture of A and C , these are 2 monomer .
And you can have A C O , you can A C O O C , let us put it B make it , and you can have , so three types of carbonate possible , this one , this three , 1 , 2 , 3 , now this peak we can find out from a homo polycarbonate of A , this one from homo polycarbonate B .
So , the third peak would be from this , now from the ratio of the intensity of these three , we can like in this NMR green spectra , we can find out what is the ratio of this particular type of present in the copolymer .
So , if you go back and look at this screen , computer screen , this is the in this process of polycarbonate this peak is correspondence to A A , this block , this carbonate , and this is corresponding to this particular carbonate , and this is for the this particular group .
So , which makes that , this is present in double amount corresponding to this individual , so if you start with a 50 : 50 mixture obviously , if it random it is from a random copolymer , you will get this as a 25 percent , this is 25 percent , and this is 25 percent plus 25 percent 50 percent .
So , if it forming A and B is forming a completely random statistical copolymer , then the percentage of these 3 carbonate peaks would be 25 percent 50 percent , and 20 percent that is exactly this is the example of 50 : 50 copolymer , this is where exactly happens .
So , this is , from this curve this NMR we can say that , in this process we get a statistical random copolymer whereas , in this case you can see that the tendency of formation of A block , A type carbon carbonate and C C type carbonate is much higher than the A C or C A type carbonate , which means the polycarbonate here is more of a block in nature , then this , this is a more random work .
So , if at least with this type NMR ’ s analysis , we can clearly say that whether a copolymer is a random copolymer or a block type copolymer .
So , if you from this chart , we can this is a this is a statistical way of presenting the expected value of mole fraction of the type of linkages in the copolymer , with the mole fraction like in this case , if we have a 50 : 50 composition of A and B , so our composition was mole percent 0.5 .
Then this a block would be 25 percent , B B block would be 25 percent , and this alternating A B clock will be 50 percent .
So , this is for a purely statistically random copolymer which is the case for in this case , so this is how we can use NMR , we can get the information about the randomness and the blockiness in this .
So , with this we stop for this lecture , and we will start the next topic in next lecture .
We have been discussing steady state analysis of mass transfer and biochemical reaction in immobilized enzyme reactors .
The effect of mass transfer is demonstrated in the performance of immobilized enzyme reactor by virtue of the effect of linear feed velocity in the case of plug flow reactors or the effect of agitation speed in the case of a stirred tank reactor or the effect of particle dimensions or particle size on the performance of enzyme reactor and these parameters influences the rate of enzyme reaction or the performance of the immobilized enzyme reactor demonstrate the role of mass transfer in the performance of the enzymatic catalysis .
We have earlier seen the role of external film diffusion as a result of a thin film that is present on the surface of the catalyst particle in the case of a enzyme reactor and we have considered the interactions of the film diffusion along with the biochemical reaction in the case of a non - porous particle and a combined external film diffusion coefficient ki along with the biochemical reaction constant was determined .
The second case is about the pore diffusion which in fact is much more pronounced in the case of enzyme catalyzed reactions because in the case of porous matrices a very large surface area where the enzyme is present is through the pore surface in the catalyst particle and so the second case is if we consider a porous matrix in which the enzyme is immobilized throughout will provide you the case of a pore diffusion regimes .
In general for an isothermal reaction which usually most of the enzyme catalyzed reactions are the effect of internal pore diffusion can be clubbed or can be expressed in a parameter what we know as effectiveness factor .
? is called effectiveness factor .
? here is the ratio of actual reaction rate in the matrix in the presence of pore diffusion resistances .
That means as a result of the substrate concentration gradient that develops in the matrix phase to that of maximum reaction rate obtainable in the absence of any pore diffusional resistance .
That means if you consider very fine particles in which the pore diffusional resistances may be negligible or there are no substrate concentration gradient across the particle physical boundaries and that means reaction is taking place in the particle at the same rate in the bulk solution and that ratio is called effectiveness factor .
Physically one can conceive the ………. .. diffusional resistances in the form of very small fine particles to that of the particle which are of larger diameter where the substrate concentration gradient becomes quite severe .
This effectiveness factor has a number of characteristics ; one is that in most cases the effectiveness factor will be less than or equal to one because the present support diffusional limitations will always reduce the substrate concentration in the particle surface .
Therefore the substrate concentration at which the reaction will take place actually in the particle boundaries will be less than that in the bulk or at the surface and therefore the effectiveness factor will be less then or equal to one .
As I mentioned earlier two specific cases demonstrate where the effectiveness factor can be more than one .
One is in the case of enzyme reactions which are controlled by substrate inhibition kinetics .
That means at higher substrate concentration the reaction velocity is inhibited .
Therefore as the substrate concentration gradient developed in the particle the concentration drops and the reaction rate can be higher than at the surface and therefore the effectiveness factor can be more than one .
The second case is due to the partitioning effect .
If suppose the matrix is charged and the substrate is also charged and if the two species have opposite charges then the concentration of the substrate inside the enzyme particle we will more than that in the bulk and therefore the enzyme reaction rate within the matrix may be more than what is obtained at the matrix surface .
Therefore the effectiveness factor can be more than one in the two cases that we have just elaborated .
The second characteristics feature of the effectiveness factor is that it is inversely propositional to particle size .
If you reduce the particle size the effectiveness factor can approach to unity which means that the whole of the matrix of the immobilized enzyme particle is able to get adequate substrate and carry out the biochemical reaction .
In experimental conditions usually no pore diffusional resistance is obtained that means effectiveness factor is approaching one with particles of diameter less than thirty microns and average pore size greater than two thousand angstroms .
That means either the pore diameter is large or the particle size is reduced .
The effectiveness factor can be made to go towards one but in these cases you face other operational problems like at the low particle size there is a risk of high pressure drop across the bed resulting in more power consumption for operating the enzyme reactor .
Also the effectiveness problem can be more serious when substrates of low diffusivities are to be processed .
If you take a substrate which has low diffusivity in the matrix the problem is more serious because the rate of diffusion is slower than the biochemical reaction rate .
Therefore the relative rate of diffusion and the relative rate of biochemical reaction are the other features which control the effectiveness factor .
The diffusional coefficient , the …. .. diffusivity of a particular substrate in an empty matrix and in the case of an immobilized enzyme particle where the path of diffusion is quite haphazard , it makes a quite a different diffusivity .
Very often in the case of immobilized enzyme particle we call it effective diffusivity rather than diffusivity .
Normally we take an ordinary particle , a spherical particle where the pores are very uniform ; say for example you have a sphere where the pores are identical , for example control pore glass then the path of diffusion is linear and of the same dimensions .
Whereas in the case of actual particles what we have encountered in the case of immobilized enzyme systems the path of diffusion is really not linear and uniform through out the particle and it can happen that you have pores almost going in a random manner in the whole particle and therefore the diffusivity that we obtained from theoretical considerations of a spherical particle is in effect different than what is obtainable of a particle at that dimensions assuming a uniform cylindrical pore .
We have also mentioned last time that if you want to analyze the simultaneous mass transfer and biochemical reaction in immobilized enzyme particle it can be expressed assuming a cylindrical pore model .
That means you assume that the substrate diffuses into the particle in the form of a cylindrical pore .
In practice it may not be actually like a cylindrical pore but just to simplify a geometric similarity and to analyze it we are just assuming as cylindrical pore and then instead of taking molecular diffusivity we consider effective diffusivity which takes care of the random nature of the pores .
Simultaneous mass transfer and biochemical reaction in the matrix can be analyzed in the form of a second order differential equation .
Ded2S / dx2 – v ’ = 0 v ’ is the apparent rate of reaction that means under apparent kinetic parameters in the case of immobilized enzyme and De is the effective diffusivity .
In the substrate concentration profile here we consider this as single pore and this pore refers to half the particle depth .
There will be another pore on this side of the same dimension so whatever dimension of the particle we are considering let us say if it is a pallet of thickness twelve we consider l as the thickness because the substrate will be accessible on both the sides .
Similarly if it is a sphere the radius is the major dimension which is important here in terms of X and therefore one needs to consider only half the particle for getting an analytical solution for the substrate concentration profile .
The substrate concentration profile for such a second order differential equation is usually obtained interms of a Thiele modulus .
f here is defined as Thiele modulus in general which is defined as a lump parameter like this which is f = l. [ ktrue.Ssm - 1 / De ] 1 / 2 ktrue is the reaction kinetic constant in the absence of any pore diffusional effects that means in the surface or in the bulk .
Ss is the substrate concentration of the surface and m is the order of reaction whatever the order of reaction and De is the effective diffusivity .
The solution of this differential equation is usually expressed in the form of Thiele modulus and a large number of workers have given the solution of this expression both for zero as well as the first order reactions for which the analytical solution can be easily obtained .
In the case of Michaelis Menten kinetics if we put the v ’ term which is a non - linear expression the analytical solutions are difficult and usually you approach numerical solutions which have been also reported in literature .
But very often for practical purposes we try to look at our reaction conditions and consider if they are closer to zero order or first order depending upon the percentage error that is involved in calculating the space time under the given set of conditions which are the inlet substrate concentration and outlet substrate concentration in the reactor and with in that regime that means fractional conversion and initial substrate concentration in that regimes if the reaction is more close to zero order we very conveniently consider our system as zero order and make the design calculations or in case if it is more closer the percentage error is less in the case of first order kinetics we go for a first order design calculations .
But alternatively …… solution using Michaelis Menten kinetics also can be obtained numerically .
The effectiveness factor for all those system is a function of the Thiele modulus in all cases whatever is the order of reaction whether it is first order , zero order or Michaelis Menten kinetics , the effectiveness factor is always a function of Thiele modulus and this function varies basically on the order of reaction as well as on the particle geometry .
That means whether particle is a sphere or a chip or a cylindrical pallet or whatever be the shape , it varies ; the relationship between the effectiveness factor and the Thiele modulus .
As I mentioned earlier the Thiele modulus is a function of the true rate constant , the substrate concentration on the surface and the effective diffusivity and physically if you look at , the Thiele modulus gives you an indication although its not an exact ratio but it really gives you a ratio between the two reaction rate or reaction rate parameters to that of rate of diffusion .
The numerator expresses the parameter resembling the rate of reaction and the denominator represents the rate of diffusion and the Thiele modulus is an expression of the ratio between the two things .
So if the Thiele modulus is high , the reaction rate is faster .
Smaller Thiele modulus means the rate of diffusion is smaller .
If you simplify the Thiele modulus expressions either for a zero order or a first order reaction it becomes still simpler .
For a zero order system it is f = l. [ ktrue. / De .
Ss ] 1 / 2 That means the Thiele modulus is inversely proportional to the substrate concentration at the surface .
On the other hand for the first order reactions the Thiele modulus is independent of substrate concentration because 1 - 1 is zero and so it becomes independent of substrate concentration .
There are ample literatures available from which one can write for pore diffusion control first order reactions , assuming spherical particles in the packed bed reactor the effectiveness factor is given as 1 / f = [ 1 / f ( 1 / tan3f - 1 / 3f ) ] That is the relationship between f and effectiveness factor and using this effectiveness factor then you can write down the reaction rate expression for first order kinetics .
One can write the reactor performance equation as - K ’ m ln ( 1 - X ) 1 1 1 e ?
= [ ( - ) ] k ’ 2E0 f tanh3 f 3 f The expression for effectiveness factor is given in the parenthesis .
The expression in the parenthesis is same and you remember we have defined right at the beginning that the reactor performance can be simplified by taking a reaction rate expression which is multiplied by effectiveness factor .
So therefore the tow the space velocity or the space time can be given by the same design expression which was used for idealized enzyme reactors excepting that the effectiveness factor for a case has been multiplied to the system .
For the first order kinetics this is the effectiveness factor as we discussed earlier .
This is in the case of spherical particles .
The same expressions when you talk of packed bed of chips that means very thin films of very fine thickness let us say of the thickness l .
In that case the tow is given as - K ’ m ln ( 1 - X ) tanh f e ?
= [ ] k ’ 2E0 f The effectiveness factor here is different ; tanh f / f where the particle thickness is very , very small .
These expressions have been obtained analytically in the case of different particle size like in the case of thin films and for spheres .
They are mentioned even for cylindrical pallets , discs .
A number of such expressions are already available in the literature which can be used .
Based on this I think one of the major studies which were reported in seventies was particularly on the mass transfer in immobilized enzyme reactor by Rovito and Kitrell .
They made physical measurements experimentally of the Thiele modulus and also calculated the effectiveness factor based on these expressions and they gave for both sphere as well as discs of different thicknesses and confirmed the validity of the first order reaction rate expression applicable in many cases of packed bed reactors .
The data points shown here are experimental data with different particle sizes say for example from hundred twenty microns to thousand microns .
They used controlled pore glass and immobilized it with glucose oxidase and measured the reactor performance with different particles sizes , the value of effectiveness factor based on the experimental data that means by taking the ratio of the actual reaction rate for a particular particle diameter divided by the reaction rate at which particularly with a very small particle size say thirty microns .
They also calculated the same reactor performance using the analytically developed reactor design equation and they found almost very good fit both in the case of sphere as well as in the case of disks .
Y - axis is effectiveness factor and X–axis is Thiele modulus .
The relationship between pore diffusional limitations and the Thiele modulus is explained in terms of effectiveness factor because if you know effectiveness factor you can have reactor performance equation , where you multiply reactor rate expression which is ?
.K2E0 / Km , a pseudo first order rate constant for an enzyme catalyzed reaction or if zero order which is K2E0 and multiply by the effectiveness factor which you are aware of .
Another thing which also has been checked experimentally , another factor which influences the reactor performance as a result of pore diffusion is the effect of increasing the enzyme loading .
Basically what you are doing when you increase the enzyme loading is you are changing the Thiele modulus .
The numerator in the Thiele modulus which gives you the reaction rate constant is increasing because the concentration is high .
If it is first order rate constant , K2E0 / Km in the case of immobilized enzyme catalyzed reaction then the value of E0 is increasing by enzyme loading and therefore as you increase the enzyme loading in this direction and some arbitrary values of let us say one , ten and hundred you notice that the effectiveness factor very sharply decreases .
That means the enzyme reactor system becomes more and more controlled by diffusional limitations and when the enzyme loading is less the diffusional limitations are less .
Up to quite a large particle size it can be considered almost free of diffusional limitations .
Increasing the enzyme loading influences the increase in f , the Thiele modulus .
The Thiele modulus on the numerator is Ktrue that is the true rate constant which is K2E0 / Km in the case of enzyme reactor for first order or in the case of zero order it is K2E0 .
So increasing enzyme loading means the concentration of enzyme is being increased .
E0 is increasing so f is increasing and increasing Thiele modulus gives you a lower effectiveness factor which means that the rate of reaction is must faster than the rate of diffusion and that is what the ratio is described by Thiele modulus and therefore the effectiveness factor decreases .
If you keep on increasing the loading you will have a very significant effect upon the final reactor performance and ultimately it may happen that the loading may have no function ; the whole reactor performance will be controlled by only rate of diffusion .
In many cases numerical solutions have been found in the case of Michaelis Menten kinetics which indicates the effect of Thiele modulus and effectiveness factor as a function of ß something like a dimension less Michaelis Menten constant which is the ratio of K ’ m / S0 .
It shows the effect of shift from zero order to first order .
The shift is when ß is small the K ’ m / S0 is also small and whereby you see the effect of ß on the effectiveness factor as a function of Thiele modulus .
In this case also as the Thiele modulus or the beta value increases the reaction shifts from zero order to first order .
ß value is increasing means from zero order to first order and in that case the effectiveness factor decreases and the same effect from the Thiele modulus is obtained in either directions .
In the case of analysis of the internal pore diffusion in the case of an immobilized enzyme reactor , the analysis amounts to determination of effectiveness factor for a particular system and that is directly controlled by the value of effective diffusivity , the reaction rate constant and the size of particles what we are considering .
If you consider say for example a combined film and pore diffusional effects and for a simplistic case of a first order irreversible enzyme catalyzed reaction , we can club the two things for example the external film diffusion and internal pore diffusion along with the biochemical reaction and the flux of the substrate can be then written as J = kL ( Sb - SS ) You will recall that in the external film diffusion , flux of substrate along the particle surface is given by kL which is the external film diffusion coefficient into the substrate concentration gradient that is developed in the film and that if we could equate to ?
.Kf.SS J = kL ( Sb - SS ) = ?
.Kf.SS This is the factor ; this is the rate of reaction or the flux through the pore diffusional limitations .
The pore diffusional resistance is expressed by ?
. Kf is the first order rate constant which can be also be written as k ’ 2E0 / Km and Ss is the substrate concentration at the surface of the particle .
If you simplify this you can write ( Sb - SS ) / J = 1 / kL That is the inverse of the film diffusion coefficient and also Ss / J = 1 / ?
kf ; Sb / J = 1 / kL + 1 / ?
kf If this Sb / J is the main flux taking into account both external film diffusion as well as internal pore diffusion and the first factor 1 / kL is resistance provided by external film diffusion and the second expression is a resistance term due to pore diffusional limitations then the overall effect is a sum of these two resistances and Sb / J will be the flux which will really be expressed in the case of a reactor performance which experiences both film diffusion as well as internal pore diffusion .
For example if you carry out continuous immobilized enzyme reactor and determine the reactor performance and if you assume that you carry out the steady state reactor performance at various feed velocities that is linear flow velocities what you are doing is we are varying the kL value .
We know that increasing the linear flow velocity will influence the kL value .
1 / 1 / kL will be increased by increasing the flow velocity the kL will decrease and the 1 / 1 / kL will increase .
If you plot flow rate inverse verses the overall rate constant , 1 / k ’ , which is defined as the apparent reaction rate constant which takes into account biochemical reaction and also the external film diffusion as well as internal pore diffusion , then you get almost linear velocity with the intercept at 1 / ?
.Kf where Kf is pseudo first order rate constant .
To get such a performance if you carry out the reaction at a low substrate concentration or even at a high substrate concentration degree of conversion fractional conversion is very high though the reactor performance will be closer to the first order kinetics .
If you consider the reactor performance in terms of zero order or first order kinetics and if you take any substrate concentration of the feed and carry out the substrate conversion to very high level then you will have the overall reactor performance which is much closer to a first order kinetics .
If the conversion level is not very high then the reactor performance will be controlled by zero order kinetics .
If the outlet substrate concentration is also very high compare to the inlet substrate concentration the reaction can be considered or atleast approximated to be equal to zero order kinetics but if the conversion is very high so that the outlet substrate concentration is very low then you can always approximate to be a first order reaction .
If you carry out the steady state reactor performance as a function of flow rate and determine the overall reaction rate constant based on the reactor performance , then you can determine by intercept 1 / ?
kf . kf is known to you depending on the kinetic parameters of the immobilized enzyme .
So the value of the effectiveness factor can be theoretically calculated and also the K ’ , the overall reaction rate constant which takes into account the biochemical reaction and combined film and pore diffusional effects .
The K ’ can be used as a first order rate constant for design of the immobilized enzyme continuous reactor .
Finally I would like you to leave with a small exercise .
Consider that the analytical solutions of a internal pore diffusion and biochemical reaction can be determined by a second order differential equation .
Let us assume that we are given some solution for the first order reactions .
If you assume that the reaction is towards zero order kinetics that means the initial substrate concentration used is high and fractional conversion will also be not very high .
If you start the feed inlet concentration say at hundred times the Km value and the final substrate concentration from the effluent is let us say fifty Km .
The whole reactor will operate almost closer towards zero order regimes and that expression can be given by Ded2S / dX2 – k ’ 2E0 = 0 If you consider that we are talking of a cylindrical disk with a thickness of 2l , I would like you to develop this solved equation to get the substrate concentration profile as a function of distance from the centre .
If this is the distance x on either sides that means the distance of the surface from the center is x on either sides .
The substrate concentration profile in such a thick membrane needs to be evaluated based on the second order differential equation .
The boundary conditions in such a case will be x = l and S = Ss .
You can consider the substrate concentration as Ss if you leave out the external film diffusion and on the other hand X = 0 .
That means at the center of the particle ds / dx is also equal to zero .
Under these two boundary conditions you simplify and get an expression for S / Ss and rearrange that in the form of Thiele modulus .
For zero order f0 = l [ k ’ 2E0 / De.Ss ] 1 / 2 This will be Thiele modulus and so rearrange the expression in the form of f and get the reactor performance or you can also find it out that at what thickness from the center that is at what value of x let us say x is equal to some critical value of l when the substrate concentration approaches to zero .
That means that fraction of enzyme will be ineffective and the ratio of the two that is l / lc will give you effectiveness factor .
I like you to do this exercise and solve this differential equation under this boundary condition and arrive at two things ; one is the substrate concentration profile within the immobilized enzyme particle and interms of surface substrate concentration and second thing is this length from the centre , the value of lc at which the substrate concentration tends to be zero .
If you assume that then the boundary conditions will change .
Is that alright ?
I think we will stop at this point .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistr y .
Till now what we have been learning for last several lectures is how to synthesize different polymers , how to make different polymers , we have learnt different types of polymerization by which we can make polymers .
And we now theoretically know that what once we do a polymer synthesis , what are the different types of molecular weight and what are the different types of molecular weight distribution we can get from our previous learning from last few lectures .
Now , what we are going to learn in next few lectures is that how to characterize .
Once you made this polymer of course we want to know that what we have made both in chemical term ; that means what is the constitution ?
What is the chemical constitution ?
What is the structure microstructure of the polymer , and also most important is what is the molecular weight of the polymers which we made , and what are the as you know that polymers seldom have unique ; all the polymers chains have same molecular weight .
So , there will be always a molecular distribution associated with when we make a polymer .
So , for the polymers which we already synthesized how what is the molecular weight distribution ?
Now for that , what we will begin today is to understand polymers in solution .
And in today ’ s lecture , we are going to learn lattice theory of solutions for small molecules and then learn about ideal solutions , thermodynamic probability and distribution and the Boltzmann equation and then learn about polymer Huggins theory of polymer solutions ; these are the sub topics which we will learn during this lecture .
Now as I said that we are going to learn polymers in solutions or polymer solution .
Now why do we need to study polymers in solution ?
As I was just mentioning that once we made this polymer , we must characterize both chemically and physically and one of the most important parameter is the molecular weight .
Now as you will see in after few lectures that most of this polymer characterization techniques for example , molecular measurements , chemical characterization , etc are done in solution .
So unless we do not know how polymers behave in solution , we will not be able to understand how polymer characterization is done .
Also many of the applications in beginning if you recall what I said that there are few applications or some applications where , though in not majority , a minor application of polymers where polymers are used in solution ; for example , eye drop where the water solvable suppose active polymers are used , detergents and there are several applications where you will find that polymers are added in solution .
So , polymers are used in the applications where the final form of the product is in solution form .
So , we must know the behavior of the polymers in solutions to understand how we can utilize these synthesize polymers in those applications .
Also biomacromolecules for example , proteins , nucleic acids ; though these polymers are not part of this course but as a comparison biomacromolecules they function mainly in aqueous environment and to understand the behavior of this biomacromolecules , one must understand the solution behavior of this molecules and the solution behavior of thermodynamics of polymer solutions is for a synthetic polymers are very similar to the treatment you will see for biomacromolecules .
So , if you understand the thermodynamics of polymer solution for synthetic polymers , you will also be able to easily understand the behavior of macromolecules in solution biomacromolecules in solution .
So , let us start with thermodynamics of polymer solution and for a solution as we know that the solution can be defined as a homogeneous mixture of two or more substances ; homogeneous means that the mixture is at molecular level .
And of course we know that from our basic understanding of thermodynamics that usual thermodynamic condition of constant temperature and pressure , for a two component system , spontaneous formation of solution requires that the Gibbs free energy of the solution is lower than the sum of the Gibbs free energy of the solvent and the solute G 1 and G 2 .
And in other words you can write that Gibbs free energy of mixing ; Gibbs free energy which is given by the difference in the Gibbs free energy of the solution or the mixture and the sum of the individual Gibbs free energy of the solvent and solute should be negative too , so that the solution can form continuously .
And we also know that the Gibbs free energy mixing can be expressed in terms of enthalpy of mixing and entropy of mixing .
So , this should be lower than 0 .
Now let us start with ideal solutions of small molecules .
Now ideal solution is a mixture of molecules having identical size .
We call a solution as ideal solution when the ingredients all the components solute and the solvent are having same size ; the individual sizes , molecular sizes are same .
And once the molecular size is same molar volume is same ; the mole fraction would be equals to the volume fraction and the change in or volume of mixing would be 0 .
So , there will be no change in volume after mixing of the components .
Now of course there is another condition that force acting between the like and the unlike molecules ; similar and dissimilar molecules are equal or in other words if you have , say , 1 as your solvent and 2 as your solute , then interaction between 1 - 1 solute - solute solvent - solvent and 2 - 2 solute - solute is same as the interaction between the solute and solvent molecules which is 1 - 2 interaction .
So , if you replace one of the molecules , say , solute molecules or solvent molecules with another one , there should not be any change in the energy of the systems .
So , energy of mixing should be 0 and as you have seen that volume of mixing is also 0 .
So , enthalpy of mixing should be 0 .
So , an ideal solution formation leads to a thermal mixing with no change in enthalpy of the system .
Now if there is no change in the enthalpy of the system on mixing or when the solute and solvent mix and form a solution , the entropy of mixing delta S m would depend only on the combinatorial entropy .
The other entropies like transitional , vibrational , and rotational entropy are associated with molecules .
They will not change at all because there is no change in thermal energy in the system delta H m is 0 .
So , those entropies will not change .
So on mixing , the only change in the entropy would be the combinatorial entropy and what is the combinatorial entropy or configurational entropy is the number of ways you can arrange a different molecules .
Number of distinguishable ways you can arrange different molecules ; the more number of such numbers , then the entropy of mixing is higher .
So , mixing becomes easier .
Let us discuss little more in next page .
Combinatorial entropy of the system is given by the number of possible distinguishable spatial arrangements .
So for a given state , we know from out statistical thermodynamics or statistical mechanics that Boltzmann equation gives the relation between the combinatorial entropy and W which is the number of possible distinguishable degenerate arrangement .
W is the possible distinguish ; all the arrangement you are doing by changing the position of the molecules has to be distinguished and they have to be of the same energy because in this case of ideal solution because interaction energies are same between like and unlike molecules So , once if you do interchange between solute and solvent molecules , they will produce degenerate arrangements .
Now let us talk about how to calculate this combinatorial or configurational entropy and we are continuing our discussion with most simpler system of ideal solution .
And you have N 1 is the number of solvent molecule and N 2 is the number of solute molecules and N 0 is N 1 plus N 2 which is the total number of molecules .
Now we have said or we have seen earlier that in case of ideal solution , the sizes of solute and the solvent molecules are similar .
So , we can have a one 3D cell 3D lattice which have N 0 number of cells and the size of the cell of each cell is same as the size of the one molecule .
Now in this slide it is shown as one of the 2D version of the 3D .
You can imagine that it is it is a 3D lattice .
So now , we have N 0 number of cells and N 0 number of molecules and each size of this cell is equal to the size of one molecule .
Now let us put or place the solute and solvent molecules ; solute are and will be shown as number 2 in this course and it is typically shown as 2 and solvent will be represented as 1 .
So , N 2 number of solute molecules and N 1 number of solvent molecules which are shown in this colors and total N 1 and N 2 is the total number of molecules and they are placed randomly in this cell .
So now , you have to calculate how many different ways you can arrange this molecules .
Now total number molecule is N 0 which is N 1 plus N 2 .
So , total number of ways you can arrange these total molecules is factorial of N 0 ; this is the number of ways you can arrange all these molecules .
Now , if you replace one solvent molecule with another or you can change the position of the solvent molecules with another solvent molecule , you can imagine that you are not creating another distinguishable arrangement .
If you replace this one with if you interchange this molecule with this molecule , you are getting the same arrangement .
Basically there this two arrangement of replacing one solvent molecule or interchanging one solvent molecules with another or one solute molecule with another solute molecules will not give you any indistinguishable arrangement .
So , these arrangements are overestimated .
So , actual number of distinguishable arrangements would be ; you divide by the N 1 factorial and N 2 factorial .
So , quickly the combinatorial entropy will be given by Boltzmann equation .
I will just do quickly N 1 factorial plus N 2 factorial divided by N 1 factorial and N 2 factorial .
And you know for large N , large value of N i Stirling ’ s approximation gives you ln N factorial ; this is from your previous mathematical knowledge .
So , you can apply this and you can write S is equal to k N 0 ln N 0 minus N 0 ; this is N 0 factorial .
So , you can just use this Stirling ’ s approximation and you get this expression .
Now I continue further simplification you will get .
So , this k is Boltzmann constant that you known previously .
Now mole fraction represented by X i or I can write capital X i mole fraction is N i by N 0 .
So , S could be given by k N 1 ln X 1 plus N 2 ln X 2 .
This is the S case for the mixture .
So , I can write this is for the mixture S m .
Now for pure solvent and solute , what will be the w ?
Number of ways you can arrange is 1 because no matter how many times you interchange the molecules you will always end up in same arrangement .
So , this is the only one distinguishable way you can arrange a pure solvent or a pure solute .
So , w 1 is 1 and w 2 for the solute is also 1 .
So , case one is 0 and S 2 is also k ln w 2 is 0 .
So , this is the combinatorial entropy for the mixture and this is entropy for the solvent and this is for the solute before mixture .
So , what is the entropy of mixture mixing in this case is same ; entropy of the mixture S 2 is given by S m and it is the same what we have seen earlier .
You can multiply it both side by and convert it to ; N 1 is the number of molecules solvent molecules and small n 1 lower case n is your number of moles solvent , number of moles of solvent .
So , N 2 is the number of moles of the solute .
Now what is del H m for the ideal solution is zero .
So , del G m which is Gibbs free energy of mixture would be del H m minus T del S m ; we get k T N 1 ln X 1 plus N 2 ln X 2 or R T N 1 ln X 1 plus N 2 ln X 2 .
So , this is your expression for Gibbs free energy of mixing Gibbs free energy .
This is the mole fraction for solvent , this is for solute , this is number of moles for solvent , then this is number of moles for the solute .
So , we can write for this ideal solution entropy of mixing is given by this expression and remember this is the same as we have seen from Raoult ’ s law which keeps the expression of entropy of mixing for Gibbs free energy for the ideal solution .
Now what about non - ideal solution ?
Now there could be three types of non - ideal solution ; one is a thermal where del H m is 0 , but del S m is not same as in case of what you have just seen for ideal solution .
Second is regular solution ; entropy of mixing is same as ideal solution but enthalpy of mixing is not 0 .
And third is irregular where enthalpy of mixing is not 0 and entropy of mixing also not same as the ideal solution .
Now non - ideal solution of small molecules is invariably due to non - athermal mixing .
As you know from your physical chemistry knowledge that any non - ideality which happens in case of solutions for small molecules are due to non - athermal mixing or delta H mixing is not equal to 0 .
For polymer molecules for polymer solutions this non - ideality is generally due to both .
It is both for non - athermal mixing ; del H mixing is not equals to 0 and also contribution from other than combinatorial entropy .
So in case of polymer solution , the non - ideal behavior of polymer solution or a polymer solution behave unlike a ideal solution of small molecule we juts discussed ; because of both the reasons , in most cases , the enthalpy of mixing or enthalpy of solution for a polymer in a solvent is not equal to 0 , delta h mixing is not equal to 0 .
And also for ideal solution , it is only the combinatorial entropy which contributes to the Gibbs free energy change for the mixing .
In case of polymer solution , as we will see in a moment that , it is not only the combinatorial entropy ; it is also the entropy change induced by the athermal process also contributes the Gibbs free energy of mixing .
And in most cases vapor pressure of the polymer solutions are invariably much lower than what has been predicted from the Raoult ’ s law which is the law describing the ideal solution .
So , how do get this combinatorial entropy or Gibbs free energy for mixing for the polymer solution ?
We have till now done the Gibbs free energy of mixing for solution ideal solution for small molecules .
Now we will try to apply the same lattice theory to find out the Gibbs free energy of mixing for the polymer solvent mixture or a solution of a polymer in a solvent .
Recall that in case of ideal solution , the molecules are having same size but in polymer obviously when you are dissolving a large polymer molecule in a solvent molecules , the size of polymer molecules are much higher than solvent molecules .
So , this assumption which we made for ideal solution is not valid here ; the sizes are solvent molecules and solute molecules .
In this case , the polymer molecules is much higher is very different .
And in case in the ideal solution we had seen that del H mixing is 0 because of the force of like and unlike molecules are 1 , 1 2 , 2 is equals to 1 , 2 and in most often interaction between polymer and a solvent molecule is not athermal .
In most cases they are specific interaction between polymer and solvent molecule is different than the interaction between a solvent - solvent molecule or a polymer - polymer molecules .
So , these are the two main difference of a polymer solution than an ideal solution of the small molecules .
Now the two scientists Paul Flory and Maurice Huggins they proposed the theory which we will know in a minute which took consideration of the large difference in the size for the solute and this is polymers and the solvent and existence of the intermolecular interactions .
So , now what we will do is we will explain or we will try to learn how the Paul Flory , Huggins theory was established using that same lattice theory which we just learnt for small molecules .
Again we will have the same 3D lattice in this case as well but here the difference is that N 1 is again the number of solvent molecules and N 2 is number of polymer molecules .
Obviously , the sizes of the polymer molecules and the solvent molecules are different .
So what we are doing , we breaking or dividing the polymer molecule in to x segments ; dividing a single polymer molecule in to x segments where the size of the each segment is same as the size of a solvent molecule .
So , x is v 2b y v 1 where v 2 is the molar volume of polymer and v 1 is the molar volume of solvent .
So , what we are doing ?
We are breaking polymer or dividing a single polymer chain in to x segments where the size of each segment is same as the solvent molecules .
So , each polymer molecule has x segments .
So , N 2 number of polymer molecules has N 2 into x segments .
So , these are the total number of polymer segments in the solution or in the mixture .
So , we require N 1 plus N 2 x which is N 0 ; this is the number of lattice we require where each size of each lattice is either same as the size of solvent molecules or same as the size for a segment of a polymer .
So , in general we have N 0 number of cells where N 1 is the number of solvent molecules and each size of the each cell is same as the size of the solvent molecules and x is number of segment of a single polymer chain and size of the segment is same as the size of the cell .
So , we have N 0 number of cells ; N 0 is given by N 1 plus x N 2 .
What we are going to do is find out first how many different ways we can arrange the polymer segments .
We are going to add the polymers in those in this 3D lattice , one after one ; we are going to add the polymer chains in this lattice one after one , one segment after one segment and once we added all the polymer chains then we will add the solvent molecules .
This is the approach what we are taking ; we will add the polymers one by one and for single polymers we will add each segment one after one .
Now how are we going to add this polymer segments .
See since we have already i ; i is the number of polymers already added .
So , we have already added in this 3D lattice which are we are not showing ; those i number of polymer molecules are not shown here to make this picture clear .
So , you have to understand that there are already i number of polymers present which means i into x number of cells are already occupied .
Each polymer has x number of segment if we had i number of polymers which is already added .
So , i minus x cells are already occupied .
So , how many number ; this is number of cells already occupied by the polymer segments .
So , N 0 minus i x is the number of vacant cell where in the next one , i plus 1 polymer chain we can place .
This is the number of cells which are vacant , because N 0 was total number of cells and i x is the total number of cells that are already occupied .
So , N 0 minus i x is the number of vacant cells .
So , this is the number of cells where we can place the next polymer molecule which is i plus 1th , i plus first .
Now i plus this polymer chain has how many segments ?
Again x segments ; this i plus 1 , i plus first chain has x segments .
So , the first segment of this polymers ; let me write this .
This is the number of vacant cells available for this i plus first polymer chains to get in .
Now the first segment ; now as I said earlier that I am showing this all are vacant , but these are all vacant i x number of cells are already blocked , already occupied .
So , N 0 minus x i is the number of cells which are available .
So , how many different ways you can place the first segment of polymer ?
There are N 0 minus x i number of vacant cell .
So , the first segment of i plus first polymer can we added how many different ways ?
Of course , it can be added any of these vacant cells .
So , it can be added in this many ways .
So , this is the number of vacant cells available for the segments to go in .
So you can arrange , you can place or you can locate the first segment in any of these vacant cells .
So , this is the number of ways you can add the first segment .
What about the second segment ?
If I want to add another molecule , another segment , not molecule ; if I want to add another segment where it has to stay of course unlike the small molecules where the molecules are apart from each other .
For polymers the segment has to be tied up because there the segments are joined to each other .
So , they can be placed in any of this first level .
So , if z is the coordination number which is the number of cells present in the first level , you can add in any of these cells .
So , I can add , say , I can add here .
So , second segment can be placed in any of this z cells .
Now what is the chance that all the z cells are vacant ; Remember the lattice already has x i number of block cell .
So , it is not that all the z number of cells will be free for the second segment to go in ; there is a probability .
So if I write the probability as p I , then the number of ways the second segment can be placed is z p ; p is the probability that the cell is vacant .
Now what is that probability ?
Total number of empty cells is N 0 minus x i divided by total number of cells .
So , this is the probability ; chances of that one of the cells if you choose and pick any of the cell from this lattice , this is the probability that it will be vacant because this is the number of cells which are vacant and this is the total number of cells present in the lattice .
So , this is the probability and this is the second segment ; number wise if second segment can be placed is z p .
From third to the last which is x z how many different way you can add ?
You can add basically the same way ; it is basically the same way you have added the second one , you have to add third , fourth , fifth , sixth , etc , the same way you have to arrange .
So , each third segment can be placed again by z p way ; four segments can be placed in z multiplied by p s and so on .
So , total number of way is then .
So , the total number of ways the polymer segments of i plus first chain can be placed and will be given by the multiplication of all this segments ; first segment N 0 plus x i second segment z p .
What I just missed here is that when you have one sample , second sample can be placed any of this z coordination number but for the third one , one is already blocked ; one of the z is blocked .
So , from third to last will be z minus 1 because one is already blocked ; one of the neighbors is already blocked .
So if I place third here , I can place third here ; I can place here , I can place here , I can place here .
One of this is already blocked ; I cannot place here .
So , it has to be z minus 1 .
Fourth one again z minus 1 ; so that is you have to remember , so z minus 1 p .
So , this is for the second segment , this is for the second segment , and this is for the third to the last segment .
Now , what I will do ?
I will quickly go through the mathematical part , not plus this is minus .
Now z , because z is quite high so I can again put z equals to minus z minus 1 .
So , I can make z minus 1 ; z z minus x minus 2 so that is x minus 1 and p x minus 1 and we know p is N 0 minus x i by N 0 that is x minus 1 .
So , I can rearrange it ; x i bring that here , x and z minus 1 N 0 x minus 1 .
So , this gives the number of possible ways this i plus first chain gets introduced in the lattice when the lattice is already has i number of polymer chains present .
So for simplicity what will be the i th chains , number of ways i th chains can be placed ; N 0 x i would be i plus 1 is i .
So , i would be i minus 1 .
So , this is the number of ways this i th chain i th polymer chain can be placed in the 3D lattice .
So , now if you want to calculate the number of ways all this chain can be placed ; we have to multiply by the possibilities of each individual chain .
So , the total number of ways the polymers can be placed in the 3D lattice will be given by w 1 w 2 w 3 w i N 2 .
By now one thing you must have noticed that what we are considering here that when you are finding the probability p , we are just taking that the chance or the probability of one cell being vacant is the number of vacant cell divided by the total number of cells .
Now , polymer chains in actual sense are these all segments are attached ; for a single polymer chain all the segments are attached .
So in true sense , the chances of finding a vacant cell near by a polymer chain would be lower than from a distance from a chain .
What I am trying to explain is that the chances of finding one vacant cell near the polymer chain would be lower than if you go little distance from a polymer chain because of segments are attached .
But we are not considering that ; we are considering that whatever polymer segments are already present , they are distributed randomly .
So , that is the assumption we are making and we are telling that is mean - field approximation where we are considering that all the segments which are already present in the 3D lattice are distributed randomly ; they are not joined , they are distributed randomly .
So , we have found the number of distinguishable ways ; all the N 2 number of polymer molecules can be placed , w p would be because each .
Again like the ideal solution , the arrangements between a single polymer chains are identical .
So , you have to divide by N 2 factorial by the total number of arrangements ; these are the total number of distinguishable arrangements .
Now I am not going to go in detail about the steps ; this mathematical steps you can get or you can refer any of the standard text books , you will find out that different steps in between .
I am going directly to the final expression of this number of ways this total number of N 2 chains can be placed in this three lattice which is number of distinguishable ways you can place the N 2 number of molecules in this sheet ; it is given by the expression we just mentioned here .
Now we just drop the steps and write the final step .
So , this is the number way and all the polymers can be placed .
Now once we had placed all the polymer molecules , now we can place the solvent molecules in the vacant cells .
Now how many different ways the solvent molecules can be placed in the vacant cells ?
All the solvent molecules are identical .
So , there is only one way you can place all the solvent molecules ; if you change the places between the solvent molecules themselves , it does not given any indistinguishable arrangement .
So , this is the only one way you can place the solvent molecules .
So , the total number of ways you can place both the polymers and the solvent molecules and complete or fill the three lattice will be given by this multiplied by one which will be this .
So , w which is the total number of ways the entire 3D lattice containing N 1 solvent molecules and N 2 polymer molecules can be filled by this way .
So , what will be the combinatorial entropy for this mixture ?
It is k ln w p or S m by k ln w p will be given by minus N 1 ln .
So , this is what we get .
This S m is the combinatorial entropy for the mixture of N 1 solvent molecules and N 2 polymer molecules .
Now what will be the S accommodated interval for the solvent .
Again the number of ways you can arrange different solvent molecules is one .
So it will be k ln 1 , again 0 ; number of different ways you can add in this solvent molecules , but unlike the ideal solution case S 2 is not equals to 0 here because the amorphous polymer chain has different confirmations and so you can actually arrange the polymer chain in different ways ; not only one way like small molecules .
So , S 2 which is the combinatorial entropy for the polymer molecule is one is not equals to 0 ; it has significant value .
So , what I will do ; I will continue I will just take this , do one more step mathematical step for simplification .
S m by k is minus N 1 ; these are simple mathematical step , I am not explaining which you can do yourself .
So , for pure polymer N 1 is 0 and for solvent N 2 is 0 .
So , S 2 for the pure polymer we can get from this expression just by putting N 1 is 0 .
It should be N 2 x minus 1 and then z minus 1 e plus ln x .
So , delta S m which is mixture minus S 1 minus S 2 would be given by minus k .
This is the term same term .
So , it would be given by k ln N 1 N 1 plus x N 2 .
So , let us do it in the next page .
Now N 1 by N 1 plus x N 2 we can write this as phi 1 is the volume of fraction .
This is the total number of segment , N 1 is the total number of molecules and we knew that the volume or size of a segment is same as the size of a solvent molecule .
So , this would the mole volume of fraction of the solvent and this would be the volume fraction of the polymer .
So , we can write this N 1 ln phi 1 plus N 2 ln phi 2 or we can write this .
So , after all this exercise we got this entropy of mixing for the polymers ; for the polymers in a solution is give by this expression and this expression is same as the ideal solution of small molecules .
Because in case of ideal solution , we knew that phi i for ideal solution of small molecules phi i was equal to the mole fraction ; volume of fraction was equals to mole fraction .
So , you can replace by the mole fraction this number it gives the same number .
So , what is this expression ?
What we will do ; we will just come back in the next lecture and by now we understood that by Flory Huggins approach we can find out the entropy of mixing for a polymer and a solvent .
So , we need to find out the delta h mixing or enthalpy of mixing for the polymer solvent so that we can get the free energy of mixing for the polymer solvent mixture So in next lecture , we will first get the enthalpy of mixing and then proceed from there to get the total Gibbs free energy of mixing for a polymer solvent system .
We were talking about methods for immobilization of enzymes and in our earlier meeting discussed the first method called adsorption .
This method includes various combination of methods including physical adsorption , ionic binding and metal salt linkage .
It also involves involvement of a carrier matrix and sometimes these are known as carrier binding methods .
The other methods that are known and available for immobilization of an enzyme are cross linking , covalent binding , entrapment within a matrix - it could be a gel , fibre or a microcapsule and finally the containment of soluble enzymes in the ultra filtration reactors and they are the whole variety of immobilization methods out of which we will be talking in a short while about the cross linking methods .
The cross linking methods involve intermolecular cross linking of enzyme molecules in the presence or absence of a solid support .
I would like to make it very clear the phrase , “presence or absence of solid support. ” While initially the enzyme molecules are interlinked through a bifunctional reagent between some of the functional residues on the enzyme protein itself , the method produces a three dimensional cross linked enzyme aggregate .
That means three or four or more enzyme molecules aggregate together through a covalent linkage mediated by a cross linking agent which is usually a multi - functional reagent and therefore the enzyme molecules form an aggregate that are insoluble in water .
They retain the catalytic activity .
That means the intermolecular cross linking between the enzyme molecules should not involve the catalytic functional group that is required on the enzyme molecule .
A characteristics feature of this method is that ultimately when you get this material you end up in a gelatinous mass .
That means you don ’ t get a particulate matter .
The enzyme molecule aggregates and comes out in the form of a precipitate , the gelatinous mass and when they are used in the enzyme reactors , they don ’ t offer a good flow property in the reactor and therefore they are not a very desirable kind of a material which can be processed in the enzyme reactor .
To overcome this very often they are used in the presence of a solid support .
When we talked about adsorption we mentioned that adsorption being a reversible process , the immobilized enzyme preparations that are produced by adsorption usually do not have very high or long operational stability .
To enhance the stability of the adsorbed material very often adsorption is combined with cross linking so that the cross linking is carried out in the presence of an adsorbate , a matrix on which adsorption can take place .
Then the cross linking is carried out , so that you get a very stable immobilized enzyme preparation which also has the morphology of a particulate matter .
If you recall the method of immobilizing enzymes by adsorption , one of the major drawbacks of the adsorbed enzymes is that they do not possess a very high operational stability .
To over come this problem if the adsorption process is coupled with cross linking of the enzymes so that ultimately what happens is that each of the enzyme molecule present here is supported on a matrix and also cross linked to each other so that it forms a multi variant force by which the enzyme will not be a desorbed because it is now covalently linked to each other .
The other advantage is that the disadvantage of the cross linked enzymes , that is the gelatinous morphology will also be removed because the cross linked preparation in the presence of the adsorbent will have the morphology of the carrier particle .
The adsorbent whatever we have used that morphology will be available and thereby one can get a much better preparation which can be used in reactor systems .
One of the important things that we should recall is that these intermolecular cross linking requires certain very reactive reagents so that the functional groups of the enzyme can covalently bind under mild reaction conditions .
Mild reaction conditions means , again I will I have to repeat , under those conditions in which the enzyme does not lose its confirmation or the functional reactivity .
For those purpose we need certain reagents which are multifunctional and also very , very reactive .
Some of the typical reagents , although it ’ s not the complete list but some of the typical reagents which are commonly used are diazobenzidine , it has two functional groups and 1,5 – difluro – 2,4 – dinitrobenzene - two nitrate groups and fluro groups and trichloro - s - triazine and hexamethylene diisocyanate .
The most commonly employed cross linking reagent over the years has been glutaraldehyde .
The most commonly used method of cross linking the enzyme molecules is by the use of glutaraldehyde which possesses two aldehyde groups separated by a hydrocarbon chain , the three –CH2 groups .
This reagent is very commonly used for all crosslinking experiments even routine as well as for practical .
The glutaraldehyde is composed of two different reactions .
When you store the glutaraldehyde solution , it is present in two different forms .
One as the free glutaraldehyde , a single glutaraldehyde molecule which contains two aldehyde groups separated by three –CH2 groups and it also occurs in the form of a dimer , in this form .
The two forms are present in equilibrium .
It is available in this form as well in this form .
From the two forms it gives you two different kinds of cross linked enzyme preparation .
While in the case of the first , the monomolecular gluteraldehyde residues , they give you cross linking reaction between the enzyme molecule particularly amino groups of the enzyme molecules are involved in cross linking and you get a chain of the enzyme protein which gets aggregated and gets precipitated .
On the other hand the dimer of the gluteraldehyde forms an addition conjugate along with the enzyme and it again gives you a precipitated mass and both the forms remain catalytically functional .
So on storage the concentration of this dimer increases .
But the only difference will be that the reaction conditions that has to be employed , when I say reactions conditions , I am referring to the concentration of the gluteraldehyde , the ratio of gluteraldehyde to that of protein , the time of reaction and the temperature of reaction will vary in the case of two reactions .
Very often it happens that some standard conditions given in the book do not exactly replicate in a laboratory experiment mainly because if the gluteraldehyde solution available is of different age they would have under gone dimerisation .
It will behave in a different way .
But both the products are crosslinked preparations and are useful .
The crosslinking method also must involve or identify certain optimum conditions for the crosslinking .
The optimum conditions depend upon the balance of parameters like concentration of the enzyme and cross linking reagent , pH , ionic strength , temperature and reaction time .
Out of a large number of studies that has been carried out for cross linking particular for gluteraldehyde usually protein concentration of 50 to 200 mg / ml is the usual range in which we operate for crosslinking .
The gluteraldehyde to protein ratio is also used at about 10 % weight by weight and gluteraldehyde concentration also varies over a large range from 0.2 to 0.6 % solution .
That means a very dilute solution of gluteraldehyde is required and at a ratio of about 1 : 10 .
That means 10 % of gluteraldehyde on the basis of protein content in the mixture and that is allowed to react for time period ranging from say about one to three hours to twenty four hours .
This time period is dependent on temperature and the temperature requirement is linked directly with the stability of the enzyme .
Some of the enzymes which are fairly stable , thermally stable , they can be held at the room temperature and you can carry out the crosslinking say for example in one to two hours , where as certain other enzymes which are very sensitive to heat , they require to be reacted at 4ºC and then the reaction requires a time interval of at least twenty four hours .
So all these parameters need to be optimized for a particular enzyme system to be able to get a gelatinous mass , which is crosslinked enzyme preparation .
While cross linking may become a useful method in the laboratory in the form of the gelatinous mass for the practical reactor operation the gelatinous mass does not offer useful flow properties in the reactors for a continuous reactor .
Therefore we usually use it along with the adsorption method .
That means we take an adsorbent , along with adsorbent or after adsorption is over we add gluteraldehyde to it and ensure crosslinking of the enzymes that are adsorbed in the matrix and the crosslinked preparation then provides you a good immobilized matrix for use in the reactors .
The other method and which has very large variety is based on the formation of covalent bonds between the enzyme and the support matrix under mild reaction conditions .
The term mild applies to the same feature and because we are talking about the formation of covalent bonds between the matrix and the enzyme molecule it brings in two major considerations .
One is because of the covalent bond formation the immobilized enzyme preparation is very , very stable .
Usually the covalently immobilized enzyme preparations will have a half life of few months when operated in a reactor and when stored under storage conditions it could go even for years without any loss of activity in terms of half life .
But on the other hand because a covalent bond formation involves very reactive reagents for carrying out the reaction at room temperature or ambient conditions , it is bound to effect the confirmation of the enzyme protein .
Although care need to be taken in covalent binding to ensure that the amino acid residues that are involved in the catalytic function are not involved in the covalent bond formation but still the reagents are not very specific .
If suppose we design an experiment to make a covalent binding with n terminal amino groups of the enzyme protein , but if the reagents will act on n terminal amino groups , it will be very difficult to ensure that none of the amino groups of the lysine are involved .
If lysine happens to be an amino acid residue at the active site there will be significant loss of activity .
In practice while we get a preparation which is highly stable , we also get a significant loss of enzyme activity .
Almost 40 – 60 % loss of activity is a very common feature in covalently immobilized preparation .
But if you consider the overall productivity of the immobilized enzyme that means the yield of the immobilization after considering the operational stability it still remains a desirable method .
The choice of the method will again depend upon the carrier cost and the chemicals involved in the immobilization method and one of the disadvantageous part is that usually the carriers here cannot be regenerated .
Because the carriers are functionalized they are attached with the protein and when enzyme confirmation is lost protein is still coupled to them in the deactivated form .
The carrier cannot be regenerated .
Therefore carrier cost becomes coupled with the cost of immobilization particularly in terms of chemicals it becomes quite high .
So unless we want enzymes with a very high stability particularly when the enzyme cost is very high we don ’ t want to lose them during the reaction and such methods are not preferred .
Most of the chemistry of the covalent binding has been developed on the basis of the chemistry available for preparing the matrices for affinity chromatography .
Because there also you couple a ligand on to a matrix by covalent binding to get a stable ligand bound matrix and almost similar chemistry because we have similar functional groups available here .
It could be tertiary amino group of lysine or end terminal amino acid groups or a variety of other groups that are available on the enzyme protein .
They could be , for example amino groups of lysine , terminal amino groups , thiol groups of cystein , carboxyl groups of aspartic or glutamic acid , carboxyl terminal groups , phenolic group of tyrosine , hydroxyl group of serine or threonine , it could be inert imidazole group of histidine .
The functional groups that are involved in the covalent binding are same as that involved in the preparation of matrix for affinity chromatography .
Almost similar functional groups on the ligands are used for making the matrices there .
So almost similar chemistry is applied excepting that in those cases ligand is a thermally stable molecule .
Methods available for choice is much broader compared to using enzymes where the stability of the enzymes become a key issue .
The covalent linkage is accomplished through functional groups that are not involved in the catalytic functions , a very standard prerequisite for any immobilization method .
A very important general observation is on the basis of the average composition of the proteins .
That means for the availability of the different amino acid residues in the protein molecules and the number of reactions that are reported for each amino acids you notice that this the kind of sequence .
Lysine has been most commonly used for covalent binding , next followed by cystein followed by tyrosine , histidine , aspartic acid , glutamic acid , tryptophane , serine , threonine and methionine as the rare case .
So that kind of a series is based on large number of methods which have been reported by people in the literature and also the average composition of protein .
This kind of a sequence is the observation which is followed .
If you look at some general principles of covalent coupling we can probably consider all covalent bond forming immobilized enzyme preparations on the basis of three classes of methods .
The A class refers to grafting of the enzyme to a pre - formed water insoluble functionalized polymer .
That means the polymeric matrix is already functionalized and has a reactive functional group which under ambient conditions can react with the functional group of the enzyme protein and give you the product .
A typical reaction is shown here .
A matrix containing functional group X reacts with the functional group on the enzyme and the grafting takes place .
The enzyme gets grafted on to the matrix and some other molecule is released .
Another class of method is co - polymerization of an enzyme with the reactive monomers .
That means you don ’ t start with the functionalized polymer .
You start with polymerization reaction starting with monomer and copolymerize in the presence of enzyme .
That means some of the functional groups of the monomer and the enzyme have to be common so that in the polymeric network at some places instead of the monomer unit the enzyme is inserted and you get a polymeric mass which contains enzyme molecules distributed in the polymeric network in that kind of method .
The third and very commonly employed method is via activation of the functionalized carrier .
You don ’ t take a preformed carrier but some carrier with some functional groups .
Activate those functional groups by certain reagent and then the activated functional groups or activated matrix can react directly with the enzyme functional group to give you an immobilized preparation .
Here a hydroxyl group containing matrix reacts with a bi - functional reagent .
Both the X and Y could be aldehyde like in the glutaraldehyde .
X and Y could be different also .
You get an activated matrix and the activated matrix then can react with the amino group of enzyme and give you the enzyme bound to it and the ammonia can be released .
A variety of methods that are available in literature for covalent binding will fall into one of these three categories .
The interesting part is that if you look into literature probably during first part of the seventies a very large number of the reactions have been reported for immobilization of the enzymes on to polymeric matrices by covalent binding .
Not that all of them are industrially useful because sometimes you synthesize an immobilized enzyme preparation but the cost considerations or the other factors which we discussed earlier may not be so attractive industrially .
But still the technique is available and for some other application probably that method might become useful .
I will take a few examples to illustrate and the first and the simplest method is diazo binding .
You get a diazonium derivative of the solid support by treating the support containing aromatic amino groups with sodium nitrite .
Under acidic conditions you get a diazonium derivative .
This diazonium derivative is highly reactive and can react with number of amino acid residues that are present on the enzyme molecule .
For example if you take this and react with a phenolic group of the enzyme molecule , it gives you a enzyme bound at the phenolic group .
Similarly it can also react with histidine group .
It can also bind to histidine group and similarly give you an immobilized preparation with diazonium bond .
No . Sorry this is N - Cl .
I think this is N NCl .
There is already N there .
Right . Diazonium derivative will have N triple bond N .
Similarly it can also react with amino group of the lysine and give an immobilized enzyme preparation .
That is one method which is used very commonly particularly because of its versatility .
Only difference is the pH requirement in the three cases .
The pH requirement here is alkaline 8 - 9 .
In the case of histidine it is 5 - 6 and if you consider through amino group , the pH requirement is also 5 - 6 .
Under control for pH conditions one can use different functional groups of the enzyme protein depending on the amino acid groups that are available at the active site to produce an immobilized enzyme preparation by azo binding methods .
A large number of methods for covalent coupling are based on peptide bond formation .
The same bond which is available in the protein molecules and a very simple reaction .
If you take an acid anhydride that can react with the amino group of the enzyme molecule and give you an immobilize preparation with –CONH - enzyme and - COOH .
One of the typical factors here is that in addition to the enzyme binding a carboxylic group is also generated which means an additional charge , a free charge on the immobilized enzyme preparation and this negative charge gives sometimes undesirable properties to the preparation and sometime it can effect unfavorably the stability of the enzyme .
To overcome this disadvantage we usually neutralize some of the negatively charged species by addition of diamines .
At the end of the reaction certain diamines are added so that this carboxylic group which is generated is neutralized and gets bound with the amino group and the preparation is neutral .
No . It cannot form a peptide bond .
Electrostatic interaction it can bind if you have a negatively charged protein .
But it cannot form the peptide bond under the mild reaction conditions at which we are talking it will be only feasible , if you have an acid anhydride group .
Take a carboxylic group containing matrix put into enzyme solution it won ’ t make a covalent bond because you need an activated matrix .
This functional group has to be active or the reaction should be feasible under conditions which are mild in the sense that they are usually very close to the ambient conditions .
Yes . You are right that this free carboxylic group will be available for adsorbing some proteins which are negatively charged and that ’ s why we try to remove this charge group so that it doesn ’ t interfere during the reaction .
Another method for peptide bond formation which is very commonly employed is by the use of certain condensing reagents , usually the group of reagents defined as RNCNR ’ .
There are two R ’ s – R and R ’ are the alkyl residues .
These reagents can combine or they can activate the carboxylic group containing matrices to give , under acidic conditions , usually pH 4 - 5 , ortho acyl iso urea derivative .
That is –COOCNHRNHR ’ .
If it is reacted with the amino group of the enzyme at pH 4 - 5 you get a preparation CONH - enzyme .
Again a peptide bond is formed .
This is not a single reagent .
These reagents which are commonly called as carbodimide are available in a whole range of these derivatives R and R ’ , which also makes its solubility properties .
Some of the reagents are soluble in aqueous medium , some are insoluble in aqueous medium and you require a non - aqueous or a more non - polar medium .
I would like to introduce you to another method involving the use of cyanogen bromide not only from the point of view of preparing the immobilized enzyme preparation but it also has an additional property that is the cyanogen bromide method is used in the case of carriers that have hydroxyl groups .
The typical example is cellulose .
If you react with the cyanogen bromide , you get an imino carbonic acid and this imino carbonic acid then can react with the amino group of the enzyme , at pH 8 - 9 under alkaline conditions , to give - CH - O - CONH - CHOH .
Enzyme is coupled here .
One of the characteristic features of this reaction and for which it has been used and valued is that you can adjust the distance of the enzyme from the matrix what we often name as a spacer arm .
We had yesterday also discussed that in the method of metal salt linkage by repeated use you can increase the distance of the enzyme molecule from the support matrix .
Similarly here this imino carbonic acid complex instead of reacting with the enzyme molecule can react with hexamethylene diamine which provides you free amino groups and the hexamethylene diamine will attach here or instead of giving an immobilized enzyme , you will be getting - CHOH–CH - O - CONH - ( CH2 ) 6–NH2 .
You can use any length of the hydrocarbon chain .
So you get the hexamethylene diamine derivative of the cellulose where you have already separated the matrix by six CH2 groups .
Therefore in most cases where the enzyme experience steric hindrances , this method can give you a preparation where by the steric hindrances are totally over come .
After cyanogen bromide treatment , you get an imino carbonic acid .
Then you can react with amino group of the enzyme molecule .
Instead of amino group of enzyme molecule you react this material with hexamethylene diamine or any compound which has amino group as the functional group and a chain of methylene groups .
So again the reaction will take place with the amino groups and the hydrocarbon chain will be inserted in between .
This amino group containing derivative can be used for immobilizing enzyme by any method which is applicable for amino group containing material .
Therefore you can get immobilized enzyme preparation which is free of any steric hindrance .
There are large variety of covalent bond formation methods available in literature .
But the choice of the method will depend on what enzyme we are trying to immobilize because we must know the functional groups that are involved in that enzyme molecule so that any method which is based on coupling of that particular functional group which is involved in the catalytic function must be avoided .
The second thing we have to know is the stability of that enzyme so that the reactions that we are using must also not be carried under conditions under which the enzyme catalytic function is poor .
If the enzyme is more stable under alkaline pH , then we can take a method which is based on alkaline pH because if you find the whole range of method , you can get in the whole range of pH conditions , whole range of temperature conditions and temperature usually we do not go higher than ambient for all these kind of preparations and the immobilized enzyme preparations .
One of the major advantages in the case of covalently bound enzymes is their stability .
They can be used over a long period of time with very high operational stability but the cost of preparation usually is much higher than all other methods .
I think we will stop at this point today .
In the last lecture , we were discussing about different types of molecular weight of polymers , and we defined number average molecular weight , weight average molecular weight , z average molecular or z average molecular weight , whatever you call , viscosity average molecular weight .
And we also introduced the term polydispersity index , which was given by M w by M n .
Now , you may ask me , what is the need for having more than one molecular weight ?
We can just simply say that polymer , this polymer has , this polymer sample has this M n .
Now , let us , let us begin with some real life example .
Now , I have ; so , for this class I have 50 students , 50 students on an average age , let us , 25 years , all of you .
If I assume that your knowledge in polymer chemistry or other subject is related to the age , then you have some knowledge base .
Now , from these students , now I take out two student and add 2 , 10 year students ; we have age of 10 years , class standard 10 , student , 5 student .
And , I take out 2 students and add 2 , 40 years , say , professors from any college .
So , what will be the average ?
Average would remain same , 25 years .
I just taken out 2 student , added 2 , 10 years ; and , taken out another 2 student of 25 years , added 40 years .
So , what do you think the samples ability to score in any subject , which depends upon knowledge , would change or not ?
The average remains same which is same as 25 years as earlier .
But , obviously , you can now understand that , because you added two 40 years professors , the ability to the knowledge or ability to score in exam is much more for this sample compared to the earlier one .
So , what I am trying ; with this example , what I am trying to convince you that , may be the average remain same in two cases ; in the first case , there was 25 years 20 50 students , and in this case , you have replaced 4 student with 4 another set of person .
The average remains same , but the property ; in this case , property being the knowledge or the ability to score marks , changed .
That means property of a polymer sample cannot be always obtained from just single value of same end , which is the arithmetic or average , like this case .
If you have a distribution , broader distribution or a narrower distribution , then the property is going to change .
How do you determine this molecular weight ?
For example , if I have these colligative properties , you know colligative properties , properties ; these are like boiling point elevation of a solvent , freezing point depression , osmotic pressure , like this .
These , you know that the property or the value of this colligative properties will depend upon the number of solid molecules .
So , if you add a polymer sample in a solvent , make a solution , the boiling point elevation for that solvent compared to pure solvent or a freezing point depression compared to pure solvent .
We will now determine on the number of polymer molecules present in the solution ; number of polymer molecules , which will give you M n , because M n is what concerns the number of polymer molecules .
Now , if I want to measure the light scattering from a polymer solution ; as you know , the light scattering is dominated by the molecules having larger sizes or larger molecular weight .
So , light scattering from a polymer solution will depend biased ; it will be heavily dependent on the larger molecules , not the smaller molecules ; which means , the property like lights catering depend more on a M w , not M n .
Alter centrifugation would depend upon M z .
Viscosity is depend upon M v , viscosity average molecular weight .
So , we need all these molecular weights as well as the distribution p d index , M w by M n , to completely under the sample ; what you mean by understand , the properties of the sample .
If I want to know the ability to scatter a light from that sample , it would , you know , we need M w value , rather than M n .
And if you want to find out the colligative properties of that sample , then we know that this is M n which we need to know , rather than M w .
And also , we will see later lectures that distribution matters for a given average if distribution changes , then the properties like melt viscosity and the strength , and the mechanical properties also changes with the distribution .
So , keeping the average same , the polymer property will change , if the distributions also change .
So , these are the reason , why we need all this numbers , or the values of all this molecular weights , not only a single molecular weight , and also the distribution .
Now , before I move to the , this lecture ’ s topic on temper polymerization , I just want to very briefly touch upon the thermo dynamics of polymerization .
Now , you know , del G is del H minus T del S .
When you making chain polymers , what you doing ?
We will making chain from the monomers .
So , lots of bond formation is taking place ; so , del H is highly negative , and because the monomers is getting tied up , del S is also negative .
So , depending upon the value of this del S and , del H and del S , the del G value will depend .
And , at normal temperature , the temperature we work in the lab , del H is highly negative which makes del G is based on 0 .
So , the polymerization is highly favorable , same polymerization highly favorable .
Now , at higher temperature , if we increase T temperature , then this second term , T del S , becomes higher and higher .
So , minus T del S will become more positive ; which means , at some point , at a very high temperature del z , del z will be the 0 , and positive above certain temperature .
In that case , the reverse reaction would start taking place ; that means , polymers will start unzipping .
Because , in normal temperature , this reverse reaction is very insignificant for 10 polymers , but typically it do not represent , say , reaction like polyethylene formation with a reversible sign .
Because , the temperature , we do normal 10 polymerization , this reverse , reverse reaction is insignificant .
Now , in case of step polymers , like we talked about PET , polyethylene teritarate , we have teritaric acid , so I have T A plus , ethylene , ethylene glycol plus , the dyol ethylene , dyol I write D A .
So , I will , ethylene dyol ED , which gives you polyethylene teritarate , plus water .
Now , in this case , these reactions are reversible , and you have a associated equilibrium constant with this reaction .
Because , the re - activities of these accidents , accidental call , they form ester is , is not very highly , highly feasible reaction .
So , often we need catalyst to make the reaction feasible .
This K would depend on reactivity of the function group as well as the temperature .
Higher the temperature , the K will go up , and your reaction will go to its right hand side .
Now , in most cases , in most practical cases , to make a high molecular polymer , you have to take this condenser out , because this is a equilibrium reaction , reversible action .
In most practical cases , these are taken out by applying vacuum ; and also increasing temperature , by increasing temperature ; and doing that , you force the equilibrium move towards right hand side , which will gives you the polymer .
Just to mention these two features that this step growth polymers are reversible equilibrium reaction , and having at a PET K value , which depend on the reactivity and temperature .
And , for a practical syntheses of step growth polymers , you need to take out this condensed from the reaction by applying high temperature and high vacuum , so that the reaction proceed to the product side .
Whereas , in case of chain polymers , it is feasible ; only at very high temperature the reverse reactions becomes significant .
Just remember this point ; we will come to the detail turbulent polymerization when the proper time comes .
Now , we will move to the step growth polymerization and its kinetics and mechanism .
Now , step growth polymerization can be classified in or grouped into types - one is , where you have polymerization done from single monomer having 2 different functional group ; so , I write A B gives you this ; for example , I can write , general reaction .
And the second group is where you have , 2 different monomer having 2 different bifunctional monomer ; I can write a general example as in the earlier case , gives you ; plus , ok ; and , 2 n minus 1 , H 2 O .
And , as we have learned in last lecture that to make a high molecular weight of this polymers , the polymerization has to be pushed with , such a way that to the conversion of the monomers or functional groups are very high , more than 98 person .
And , also we will see that another conditions required for this type of polymerization to make high molecular weight , is that the two functional groups has to be present , so , S symmetric amount ; that means , the ratio of NH 2 O group and COH groups has to be 1 isto 1 ; that is another requirement .
We will find out more about that in , little later .
So , as we had seen in earlier lectures that ; we write this step wise reaction to describe a step growth polymers , or general you can write m r plus m r , gives you n plus m , m r .
So , in a polyestrification reaction , when you are forming a polyester form the higher C than diol , or form a hydro oxide acid , at any point of time , we will find , in the mixture dioxides and very different size of dioxides , diol and hydro oxides acid , and so on .
And , all this reactions happen between the functional groups ; so , polyester case , reaction between OH and COOH .
If we want find out rate of this polyester exhibition reaction or the step growth polymerization , you need to know the rates of each step , and then sum up to get the rate of the final polymerization .
But that is very difficult job ; is in practical to find out rate for individual because there is so many reactions happening , different possibility .
Then , if you want to know the reaction leads for each and individual steps and then finally , sum them to get the final rate ; that is practically a impossible task .
So , this is simplified ; it can be very simplified , if we imagine that rates of all this reactions are same .
Now , this reaction is nothing but reaction between functional groups .
Though the sizes of this species are different , but the final reaction is between OH group and COOH group for a polyester exhibition reaction .
So , we can assume that the rates of this individual steps are different , and first it was proposed by Flory , and which is proposed as the equal reactivity of functional group , functional groups ; Flory , who proposed first .
Now , what are the , what does it mean by equal reactivity of functional group ?
One : that reactivates of both functional groups in a bi functional monomers are same .
For example , if we have a diol , or a di acid , or a hydro oxide acid , in case of the polyester is , reaction is just talking about ; re - activities of both the functional group 1n the bi functional monomers are same .
Now , what is , the second point is that , the reactivity of one functional group is independent of the other function group present in the molecule ; which means , whether the other functional group is reacted or not , if we have bi functional molecule with 2 functional group two side ; now reactivity of one functional group is independent the other .
So , you can say that whether the other functional group , it present in other end of the molecule , whether that is reacted or not , that does not determine the reactivity of the other side , as the function group is in other side .
And second , it is independent of size of the molecule , or how for the two functional group are present ; whether they are present in the dimer , or in a octamer .
So , the functional , the reactivity of more the functional group is independent of the other functional group irrespective of the length in between , which makes this , all the reaction as happens in the step growth polymers , polymerization process , they are same .
Now , this assumption is a shear assumption , and it has been proven experimentally .
For example , this reaction ; Long back , by this 2 scientists , it was shown that this reaction , this esterification reaction becomes independent ; the rate of this in , esterification reaction becomes independent , when x is greater than equals to 3 ; which means , the reactivity of COH group is independent of the chain length .
And , not only this is true for mono functional agent , this reaction can be shown through , if you have the another COH in the other side .
So , if you have a dicarboxylic acid and reaction it has already proved experiment , that if you have a di carboxylic acid , a reaction with ethyl alcohol , again the rate is independent of the chain length of the di acid group .
And , if the rate becomes limited , you know , when they becomes equal , whenever the chain grows , the significant number in this case , say 3 .
Another example , we can show , the other , the other example where .
Now , rate of this polyesterification reaction is again , it become independent on the value of x as well as the n .
These examples prove that the assumption we made earlier , in terms of equal reactivity of function group , is valid .
And that has been , it is not something here imagining to make our life simply , to my , make our life simplify .
This has been experimentally proven fact , that the reactivity of the equal , the functional groups are equal when in molecular species s present in a step polymers state .
Now , this can be justified , if you think little more .
For example , how the reaction takes place ?
In this case , between the two functional groups , between OH and CH for a esterification reaction ; the reaction takes place by the collision between the 2 functional group ; not all the collisions are useful ; not every collision between the OH group and COH gives you esterification .
But fraction of collisions which can work on the activation minutes will give you a pester .
So , as we know that the reactivity , for the finally , the outcome of the reaction , it depends upon the collision frequencies .
Now , when , this functional group present in a small molecule , compare a situation if you have the functional group , 2 functional group present in a regal molecules ; now , is under stood that regal molecules will have lower deficivity , they have lower deficient rate .
So , the collision frequency between the 2 molecules , 2 oligomer in this case , we will ; understand ; I am talking about the collision frequency between the two molecules .
In this case , 2 oligomers having 2 function groups at the end , they will work if you compare with this smaller , smaller molecule .
But same times , same logic , when they come close , they will stay longer , because their rate of the fission is lower .
And , if they stay longer , then the probability of collision between the functional groups which are present at the end also increases .
So , the collision frequency between the functional groups also increases .
So , same time the collision frequency between the molecules coming down because of size being higher , but the collision frequency between the functional groups , they are becoming more .
So , on effect , this two are rarifying each other , and so , final collision frequencies between the functional groups present in a smaller chain compared to a larger chain are equal ; and , as the collision frequency , the final functional groups are equal , the reactivity or the rate of reactions also equal .
So , now we will move to the ; with that example , I will go to the kinetics of step growth polymers .
And , before we start kinetics of step group polymers , we define another term , or we talk about Carother equation , which gives you the average degree of polymerization ; sometimes written as DP , is a average of polymer , degrees of polymerization .
Now , what is degrees of polymers ?
We learned in the first lecture , is the number of structure units present in the molecule or in a polymer chain .
As I said in the first class itself that structure units and repeat units are different , and it will become more clear , I just give 2 examples .
Let us talk about stirring .
And , in this case , this is a repeating unit ; it is same as a structure unit , structure unit is the residue of the monomer .
So , in this case , repeating unit , or number of repeating unit is same as number of structure units ; molecular weight of repeat unit is same as molecular of structure units .
In case , polyethylene teritarate , this is the repeat unit .
So , what is the relation between repeat unit and structure unit , in this case ; and each repeating unit contains 2 structure units .
So , the molecular of repeat unit is the average of the structure units minus , the conducted which had gone out , in this case water molecules , because of the condensation reaction .
See , this is specific case as a polyethylene , this is structure units , and repeat unit is this .
So , in this case , molecular of structure unit is twice the molecular of repeat unit ; this is the repeat unit , and this is the structure unit .
So , the molecular of structure units twice the molecular repeating .
So , this is a specific case , this , this example is not , there are many many case .
So , they , this two are more common , where the molecular of repeat unit is same as structure units ; where , second case where molecular structure unit is the summation of the average server .
So , basically we had to put twice ; average multiplied by twice for this .
So , the X n is the average number of structure units per molecule .
Now , this can be given by N 0 by N ; if N 0 is the total number of monomers at the beginning , and N is the total number of chains present at after polymerization or some time .
How do you get ?
You just simply think that , say if you have 50 of your students , I ask to occupy 5 benches .
Now , they are big benches ; we can occupy any chairs if you choice ; so , all 50 of you distributed in the 5 benches .
Now , at the end I ask you to hold hand and tell me , what is the average , average number of student in a particular bench ?
So , you have total number of 50 students , in the 5 bench .
So , average per bench is 50 by 5 , that is 10 .
Simply , if you are starting with N 0 of monomers and then finally , you have present , you are remain with N mono N chains , then each chain will have N 0 by N structure units ; simple .
Now , if we note , we define conversion or if conversion is P , now , how do you define conversion P ?
Total number of functional group reacted divided by total number of functional group present .
Now , N 0 was the number of molecules , or monomers at the beginning .
And , now , N is the monomers present .
So , N 0 minus N is the number of monomer or moles of monomers reacted , divided by , N 0 is the total number of monomers the beginning , and each monomer has 2 functional group .
So , multiplied by 2 functional group , 2 each to make the total functional group reacted .
So , this is the number of molecules present at this , at this movement , any time during the reaction .
So , N 0 minus N is the monomers which are reacted .
So , you multiplied by 2 to get the number of moles of functional groups reacted , and N 0 was the monomers were present originally .
So , N 0 by 2 is the number of functional group present at the beginning .
So , this is the fraction which has reacted .
So , I write N 0 by N , N 0 ; I can rearrange this to get N 0 by N as 1 by 1 minus p .
So , if you compare this and this , I can write , the average degree of polymerization is given by 1 by 1 minus p .
Now , this is again giving the same information as we got in earlier cases , in earlier discussion .
To have a high molecular weight polymer you need to have high value of X n , is the number one monomer unit or structure unit present in the system .
How do you get a high value of X n ?
Only the p is high ; if it is p is 0.98 , may be 90 percent of the function groups has reacted , you get 50 ; X n is 50 .
If it is 0.99 , there will be 99 percent of the functional groups are reacted , then you get 100 .
So , look , how it is from 99 , from 98 percent reaction to 99 percent reaction , you are getting jumping degree of , average degree of polymerization from 50 to 100 .
I should think about the lower values of p , 97 percent , or even 90 .
If 90 percent of the fractional groups are reactive , when normal organic reaction is in small molecules ; say , we have an esterification reaction , a 90 percent reaction means , you all happy ; if you not happy you increase , do something to make a 95 percent reaction , then very happy .
Whereas , in case of polymers , if you do 90 percent , in step growth polymers we have a 90 percent conversion ; p is 0.9 , then this gives you 10 ; X n is 10 .
So , it is a oligomer .
So , 90 percent conversion is not enough to give you high molecular polymer .
So , again stating it for getting high molecular polymer , you made a conversion p greater than 0.98 and so ; 0.98 give you 50 and so , as increase will be p , the higher and higher value of X n .
How do you get molecular x from , you got X n average degrees of polymers from this ; you can get experimentally , p , q , can experimentally determine the fraction of molecule present .
So , if you do it activation for curio oxide acid , you can get the fraction of from beginning .
So , you can get X n multiplied by the molecular unit of structural unit , plus , the molecular unit of , molecular unit of the groups of the end .
So , if I take a example of adipic acid , plus ethylene glycol , you get a polymer of this .
So , molecular weight of the repeating unit in this case , this is the repeating unit , is the molecular weight of this entire repeat unit , which is 172 .
But , molecular weight of average molecular of the structure unit in this case , we have 2 structure units in this unit .
So , the molecular weight of structure unit ; in this case average , because 2 are different .
So , I can write M s u average is 172 by 2 , is 86 .
So , and what is the molecular weight of the n group ?
OH plus H , it gives you 18 .
So , the total unit of this polymer would be given by X n bar multiplied by 86 plus 18 .
So , this is , this is very important part .
Now , the molecule , relation between molecular weight and degrees of polymers ; Molecular weight , M n , is degrees of polymer multiplied by the molecular rate of the structure units .
If the polymer is made from 2 different monomers , like in this case adipic acid and its glycol , then molecular of structure will give the average of that , of that .
Some people , or some students in , from our experience , you have seen that they confused this with the repeat unit ; then they were confused that this is a molecular repeat unit , this is molecular rate of the structure unit .
So , this is 86 not 172 for this example .
And , in more of an , in all practical cases , we can ignore this contribution from n group .
So , most often we write , M n is this .
Now again , this is molecular of structure units , if this is , this is synthesis from two different monomer in this case adipic acid and ethylene glycol .
This is average of the residues of the monomer ; the monomer minus the condensed , in this case H 2 O .
And , average of that , so , this is 86 ; not the molecular rate or the repeating rate .
If you take repeat unit , you will be doubling the calculated molecular weight M n for this .
Now , let us come back to the kinetics of step growth polymers .
Now , just to illustrate the general poly esterification ; we will take a example of poly esterification as the example of step growth polymers .
And , we take as earlier , di oxide plus diol gives you polyester .
And , as I said that , in most cases for practical purposes , you need a catalyst to increase the reaction rate .
So , I can write this X n reaction for this H A represents the acid .
This is the reaction scheme for a polyestrification process .
And this waved lines means that it is applicable for any size ; no , we are talking about general reaction , it could be a end of the dimmer or in dimmer and so on .
And so , as this , the hydro oxide group ; remember , we talked about the equal reactivity of functional groups ; so , we are considering all this functional group present at the end of a molecules are equal .
So , we consider this general reaction .
Now , for all practical purposes , as I said that , this are equilibrium reaction ; this condensed are taken out from the reaction by applying high vacuum and high temperature .
So , that this reactions are all most exclusively on the right hand side .
So , the k 5 , k 6 and k 4 are very small ; k 6 , value of k 6 and k 4 are insignificant ; we can ignore them , because in most practical scenario , we take out this 2 from the system to make reaction move towards right hand side .
Now , we will come back to the cases where you cannot take out the entire amount of H 2 O produced ; we will talk about the expression for those cases later .
For this case we are ignoring this 2 , and so that the value of k 6 and k 4 are very in significant .
And , also this k 3 is the ; the value of k 1 , k 2 and k 5 , they have much higher value compared to k 3 .
So , this reaction is your state , rate determining in state , which is given by the rate constant value of k 3 .
So , if I want a write a rate expression , rate of polymerization R p will be given by loss of acid group from the reaction ; this is , we talked about this reaction .
So , from this reaction you are getting the , this is 1 .
So , the rate of reaction is given by k 3 and the concentration product of this 1 , and which 1 is this ; number 1 is this .
Now , from the first reaction , this one , we can write a equilibrium constant k 1 by k 2 , is this 1 by concentration of COOH and HA ; from this reaction , we can write equilibrium constant is this ; concentration of this , divided by the concentration of this , and concentration of that .
So , I can , from this expression I can put the concentration I value to this expression , to get R p minus d COCH by d t , gives us k 3 K COOH HA and OH .
I can write this as another constant OH .
Now , we can consider two specific cases , where you have self catalyst ; that means , you are not adding external catalyst , excess catalyst from outside ; H is not , as said outside ; the COOH groups present in the medium are acting as a catalyst ; in that case , you can write this as K COOH square and concentration of OH .
Now , as you now that , most cases the reaction is carried out with the isometric amount of COOH and OH .
So , you can replace OH by COOH concentration , which gives you this ; and I write this as K M cube to make it simplified .
So , M is concentration of either COOH or OH in this case , because both are used in isometric amount .
So , I quickly integrate this expression , d CoOH by d t is k M cube ; minus , this we can put M ; minus M by M cube is k d t .
I integrate from , at t is equal to 0 , M is M 0 , and at t is t , M is M , which leads you , minus , this minus here ; minus of minus half 1 by M square , minus 1 by M 0 square is k t ; or , 1 by M square , 1 by M 0 square is twice k t .
Now , again , from definition of a conversion , we can write that amount of monomer present is , the amount of monomer present initially at t is equal to 0 , minus conversion which makes this ; and I am going little fast , but you can yourself go through it and understand no problem .
So , from this , I can now write ; or , X n square , k t .
Now , you can do yourself for an external catalyst reaction .
We had the original rate equation R p is , d t is , k 3 k COOH HA and OH .
Now , if this is added from externally ; the concentration of this is 6 .
So , with this and this , you can take this ; a new constant ; put this .
So , if this makes you , again COOH square .
I can write , similarly , d M M square is t .
Similarly , integrate form M 0 to M , t is equal to 0 to t ; and you finally get , 1 by M minus 1 by M 0 we get as t , which will lead to 1 minus 1 by p minus 1 t ; or , X n is 1 plus M 0 k dash t .
Now this was for self catalyst , and this expression for external catalyst .
See , if you can , you going to plot time with molecular width , in this case , for a external catalyst you get a straight line for X n by verses t plot ; and in case of self catalyst you get , square verses t as a plot .
As you can find out from this , to increase , if you increase the time , it is always , you get more increase in the molecular weight , when this is external catalyst .
This was for external catalyst , this was self catalyst .
If you increase the time 4 times , the molecular weight also increases 4 times , in case of external catalyst .
But if you increase the time 4 times , you are only double increasing molecular weight for a same catalyst reaction .
That is a reason , it is always very difficult to get a poly conversion reaction by a self catalyst reaction , we always add , we always , typically in practice , we always add catalyst from outside .
Now , what we will do in next lecture is , we will take this , this two expression , and start from there in the next lecture .
And we will talk about this plots , little more ; and , how , what does it signify .
And we will talk about the other aspects of step growth polymerization in next lecture .
We will continue this step growth polymerization in the next lecture .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
And in this lecture , we will continue our discussion on polymer solutions , the remaining part , and then start a new topic on chain dimensions , polymer chain dimensions .
And we planned to just complete the discussion , we were having on phase separation behavior of polymer solutions .
And then in chain dimensions , we will talk about size and shape of polymer chains , and take different chains , freely rotating chains , chains with bond angle and short range restrictions .
And then finally , with long range steric interaction and excluded volume .
Now , let us just complete the discussion , we are having in the last lecture , you know , from Flory Huggins equation , we have seen this is a , this is the Flory Huggins expression and then we converted to Gibbs free energy of mixing per segment in the last lecture , and which was turned out to be this .
And then we said that if we plot this expression .
We can , we will find this type of general , this type of general curve .
These are corresponding to different temperature .
And we discussed that there could be one type where the polymer is soluble in the solvent at any composition , and then there could be another type where you have in left hand side and in this side , you have complete solubility , and you have a region where you have metastability , thermo dynamically unstable , but metastable for small fluctuation in composition , and then you have a completely insoluble region or unstable region .
Now , these are the points to minima , who have the , which has the , which have the common tangent , they are called binodal points or bimodal composition , and the inflection point which is the boundary between metastable unstable region .
They are called spinodal points .
These are called binodal and these are called spinodal points .
And now , you can see that this both the binodal points as well as the spinodal points , they are actually temperature dependent .
If you change the temperature of your polymer solvent mixture , they are , they will change .
So , these are the possible different temperature where T 6 is the highest and T 2 greater than T 1 and so on .
Now , what we are going to do , we are going to plot this binodal and spinodal points with respect to temperature .
So , if you have t , there are T 1 .
So , this T 1 you have two binodal points and two spinodal points .
At T 2 , you have again , this is the binodal points and these are two are the spinodal points .
So , you have binodal points here and you have spinodal points here , like that you plot T 3 , and T 4 , and T 5 , and T 6 and so on .
So finally , you will get these , you get these points .
Now , you join them , you join to get a line for the binodal points and a line for the spinodal points .
So , if I want to join them at different temperature , I will get a line for the binodal points .
This is for binodal and then similarly , I get line for the spinodal points which will coincidence or converge in a same temperature , which we call T c , critical temperature and the corresponding composition here is phi 2 c which we discussed in last lecture , here .
So , you get this is specifically a plot of polymer phases with temperature changing and with different composition .
So , If I , this is the region where this is unstable or two phase system , this is a metastable system which is thermodynamically unstable , but metastable and this outside is completely stable .
Now , if you start see , if you start from here , a point from here , a composition from here corresponding to this corresponding here .
So , if you start a point here ; obviously , this is a single phase system soluble , and then if you cool the temperature , what will happen ?
At this temperature , they will start precipitating .
So , they will start forming two phase system , because this is that is metastable , thermodynamically unstable ; similarly , if you start from this temperature , this point , this composition then they will start precipitating this temperature .
So , if you change the composition ; obviously , the temperature at which the two phase or the precipitation starts will vary .
These this points where this two phase actually gets generates or the polymer become insoluble , they are called cloud points ; whereas for these composition , at critical temperature it will start forming two phase or polymer become insoluble , above this temperature , you can , you have any composition , they are insoluble .
So , basically this temperature is called upper critical solution temperature and that happens , because if you remember our excess chemical potential term .
Now , it can be expressed , we have expressed earlier in two components , it contains two components ; one is enthalpic excess and more enthalpy and one excess and more entropy .
Now , both these term excess term also dependent on the temperature as well , and you can also express in terms of polymer solvent interaction parameter and finally , with entropy parameter .
Now , chi which is polymer solvent interaction parameter also temperature dependent .
Now , most cases , most of the polymers , this entropic term is negative ; most of the , in case most of the polymers , as we have seen earlier this entropic term is positive .
So , if .
So , at some temperature which is higher than theta temperature , this excess term will become positive and you will start getting precipitation .
So , these are the corresponding temperature and in those system , you will get a upper critical solution temperature .
Now , in some polymer system which are not very frequently observed , you get this type of behavior which is a lower critical solution temperature , where the entropic term entropic term is negative .
One example , very common nowadays used in research is polyanisopropylaclamide .
Now , this polymer , polyanisopropylaclamide , this is has a hydrophobic group .
Now , if you dissolve this polymer in water , what happened ?
These two groups participate in hydrogen bonding with water , but because this is hydrophobic group to hide this hydrophobic groups from water , the waters form , water molecules form structured around this hydrophobic group which we call hydrophobic hydration or cage formation and results , you get a negative entropy .
The entropy actually comes down because of structuring of the water molecules this hydrophobic groups .
Now , in addition to the combinatorial groups , which is always favorable , favorable in mixing process ; in this case , this entropy , because of contact between the polymer and the solvent , which is opposing the mixing process .
So , in this case , the entropic parameter is negative .
So , psi is negative .
So , what happened ?
Then unless you have the temperature lower than theta , you will not get the solution .
So , what happens ?
As you go down in temperature , you get from insoluble system to soluble system , and when that the particular temperature , when that happens for all composition , we call that temperature l c s t .
L c s t can be observed for this two cases as well , where we have psi parameter negative ; another polymer is polyehtyleneglycol , you can have l c s t because you have a strong interaction between the polymer and the solvent .
Now , what we have seen in last lecture that if you , this spinodal binodal points , for this binodal points , this , you have still first derivative 0 , for spinodal points you have second derivative 0 , and for the critical point spinodal curve and the binodal curve merges , the third derivative is also 0 , and if you just use that formula that gives free energy , this formula and differentiate with phi two , then you will get these expressions .
Now , if you know the dependence of chi with temperature then you can find out the spinodal points ; and the critical points is given by this expression .
And if you can combine these two , you can get the critical entropy , the polymer solvent interaction parameter by this expression .
So , let me write it again .
So , critical composition at which the polymer started , starts a separating out from solution is given by 1 by 1 plus x , x is the number of segments , chain segments which is always very high , x is always much , much greater than 1 .
So , you can write 1 by x .
So , the critical concentration at which the phase separation first appears going from a two phase region , from one phase region in to two phase region is thus predicted to occur at low polymer concentration , if we have say polymer having a polymer weight of 1 million 10 to the power 6 gram per mole , and then if you have the repeating this molecule to this is hundred , this is the molecular weight , then x would be close to 10 to the power 4 close to ten to the power 4 , then phi 2 c would be 0.01 .
So , basically if you have very high molecular weight then the concentration at which the polymer starts from going , from becoming one phase system to two phase system is very low , if your polymer molecular comes down then this goes to little higher concentration .
Now you also know , second , this is , this shows that the critical composition at which the polymer becomes one phase system to the two phase system is highly dependent on the molecular weight because this is also proportional to molecular weight .
So , you can molecular weight to the power half .
So , as the molecular increases , this goes to lower and lower composition .
Now you can .
So , this , you can also write from our previous knowledge that this is the enthalpy parameter , this is the entropic parameter and theta is kappa T psi .
So , we can write minus psi 1 by theta by T half minus chi .
We can set T is equal to T c and theta is equal to theta c at T is equal to T c chi is equal to chi c , we can write from this , minus psi 1 minus theta T c to half minus chi c .
Chi c , we have only the got from last expression .
So , that is half , minus half , just one minute , this is chi minus half .
Let me do it again , its just some confusion , let us just do it again .
So kappa minus psi , we know .
So , theta is T by psi .
So , minus… These are the expressions we know .
Now from there , we can write 1 by T c ; for large x , we can write one by T c is one by theta one plus b b is b 1 .
This v bar is specific volume of polymer and v 1 is molar volume of solvent , then we can write the number of segments like this ; and we define the term b as this .
So , we can , for large x , we can remove or discard this term , ignore this term .
So , we can write this .
So , which means that one by T c is proportional to M to the power half ; that means , the critical temperature is again like the critical composition in this , critical temperature also varies with the molecular weight .
So , if your molecular weight goes up then your critical temperature also will go down .
We have seen earlier that your molecular goes up , critical composition also goes down .
And in this case , we are seeing that the molecular goes up then critical temperature also comes down .
So , we can plot these two .
You can see what we have observed , this is experimental curve for observed for solutions having polymer and solvents having upper critical solution temperature .
So , as the temperature goes up , this is temperature , as the temperature goes up the critical temperature also goes down and the critical composition at which the phase separation take place , they also become lower , lower ; this is experiment cup which we just seen from theoretical calculation that if the temperature goes up both T c goes up and the phi 2 comes down .
Now , these expression is also throws up one more interesting conclusion that if say molecular rate is very high close to infinity then 1 by T c would be equals to theta or theta would be equals to T c .
If M is close to infinity or m tends to infinity or T c is equals to theta , which means that critical miscibility temperature , theta is your critical miscibility temperature in the limit of infinite molecular weight .
So , that is another observation we can make from this expression .
So now , we completed our discussion on the polymers solutions and in phase separation .
Now , what we now , we will shift to the new another topic which is chain dimensions .
Now what mean by chain dimension ?
What we happened in typically , how do you write polymer ?
When you have seen in the books , you have seen me always writing polymers like this , something like this , we never write polymers like this , we never write polymers like this , we always write whenever represent polymer , we write a quily chain .
Now , that is because that that because the polymers are long chain and you have there is a numerous possible confirmations , because you have a rotational freedom across the backbone and if the polymer chain rotates across the backbone , obviously you will get different chains different confirmations and the backbones are quite flexible in case of polymers .
So , that is the reason you get this type of confirmation most of the times .
This is a , let us consider a simple polyethylene molecule .
This is the chemical expression .
Now , this does not capture the numerous confirmations a polymer chain exists .
Now , as I said that the existence of the , these numerous confirmation results from the rotational degree of freedom that a single bond allows .
You can , depending up on the substitution , the rotational , the rotation across the single bond always allowed Now , if you have so many bonds in case of , so many single bonds .
So , polymer , polymer polyethylene you have so many single bonds .
Now , each you can rotate , they are rotatable .
So , that is the result you get , so many , so many confirmations .
Now , as you have this so many confirmations , the size and shape of the polymer molecule will depends on ; obviously , the chain length , now as the chain length goes up , you expect the size also go up ; obviously , .
Secondly , it depends up on the chemical structure or chain stiffness .
Now , if you have say polyethylene molecule or say polystyrene molecule ; obviously , the rotation , the rotational freedom across the single bond will be much lower in case of polyethylene than polystyrene , because of bulky substituent , the rotation across the single bond will be restricted in case of… So , polystyrene is a stiffer chain , we will say that this is the most stiffer chain than the polyethylene , or in other words , polyethylene is a more flexible chain than polystyrene ; but still , in spite of being this phenyl in side group , it is still , it is also having significant freedom across the single bond , rotational freedom across the single bond .
So , it will also be a , but the degree of may be lower than most flexible chain like polyethylene .
So , if the third one is of course the molecular involvement which depends up on where the polymer is if the polymer is in a solvent then obviously , if the interaction between polymer and solvent is higher than or main interaction between solvent - solvent and polymer - polymer , then the polymer solvent interaction will be preferred .
So , the polymer will try to expand its chain .
So , bigger in size and if the polymer solvent interaction is lower compared to the main interaction of polymer - polymer and solvent - solvent , then it will try to contract and avoid the solvent molecules .
Now , if you , if the polymer present in a concentrated solution then one polymer will come close to another polymer molecules .
So , that will in effect not allow polymer to expand .
So , they will again try to contract .
So , these are the factors where the polymer is in dilute solution or concentrate solution , this is a good solvent or poor solvent or theta solvent that will dictate the size and shape of the molecules polymer molecule .
Now , let us talk about shape first .
We are using the terms size and shape .
What do we mean by shape ?
As we mentioned in most cases , we write polymer chains like this or something like this , never we write this , because polymer chains as we have seen , they are having single bond where rotation occurs in bond are possible .
So , you get a flexible a chain and in most cases we highly coiled these are coiled structure .
So , we get highly coiled chains .
Now , if the stiffness goes up , if you make more stiff , the coiling , the flexibility comes down , coiling will not be possible .
So , if the , if the say this is like a coiled structure , if the stiffness goes up , it may be like something like a worm like , because it is not so flexible to become a coil ; and if the chain becomes , even more steep then finally , it will be like a rod .
So , this is stiffness goes up , stiffness of the backbone goes up ; most polymers , we will deal in this class and we come across in application , they are falling in this category where the polymer is enough flexible to reclose to a random coil than a worm like than a rod like .
So , the confirmation the confirmation of a flexible chain looks like random flights of division of particles , when particle say , gas particle diffuse then what happens ?
Moves here randomly , random fly , random flight .
Now , polymer segments or polymer bonds cannot be so random because you have restriction of this lengths , each gas molecules can move like this .
So , it can take any steps wherever it wants , any direction , but in case of polymer molecule , states are fixed as the bond length of the , each of the bond length of the backbone , repeating unit ; and there are restriction of each bond angle , and there are restriction of also in rotational , we will come and talk about those in details ; what I am telling it is , in case of polymer also , it takes the segment takes random flight , random walk , but not as freely as a gas molecules do in case of diffusion ; because it takes random walk or random flight , we call this the confirmations of flexible polymer in solution are in melt as random coils or Gaussian coil .
Now , let us talk about size .
We have talked about shape , it could be random like , worm like looks , like rod like and most cases , we deal with their enough flexible to become closer to a random coil .
So , we will deal , we will discuss only about random coil , not about the other two confirmations of polymer molecules .
Now , let us talk about size .
What is size ?
When you write a polymer chain like this , as we saying all the time , we write polymer chains like this .
Now , what we , what do you mean by size ?
Of course , one of the basic size is contour length , contour length is basically n multiplied by l , n is the number of bonds and l is the , n is the number of bonds and l is the length of each bonds .
So , basically of , you arrange all the bonds one after one , all the bonds , the length will give you the contour length .
Now , which is in practical , in a polymer chain or any chemical chain will not be , will not have this type of arrangement .
So , this is just theoretical number .
So , as the maximum theoretically possible length one polymer can have , if just put all the bonds , all bonds in straight line one after one .
Now , we said this the polymers behave like this in random coil .
So , another dimension we can have , it is like end to end distance say , if this is one end and this is another end , where we have r , we call end to end distance .
Now , is this polymer confirmation is fixed ?
No , it is not fixed because there are continuous rotation across the single bond .
So , you may have one now and immediately after next moment you may have these are apart , or next moment you can have something like this , where we insert like this .
So , as the polymer confirmation is changing all the time , you cannot have a fixed value of end to end distance , because this might have some value which is defined from this value , which is defined from this value .
So , what we do statistically , we find probability of finding one length , how much and then use this term where this represent time average .
So , you with time , what is the average ?
r square to the power half .
So , that is the root mean square end to end distance .
So , this because the polymer change is always changing with confirmation , you cannot write a fixed r , you have to write statistical parameter which is given by a root mean square end to end distance .
Now the third parameter which we can mention is like a radius of gyration .
This radius of gyration is defined as the root mean square of distance of the elements of chain from center of gravity of the coil .
So , if you have a coil and if this is the center of gravity then all the segments .
So , these are the distance of all the segments , all the elements , numerous numbers .
So , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 .
So , root if this is one is s , again the root mean square distance of the elements of the chain from the center of gravity or center of mass of the coil is called the radius of gyration .
Now fortunately , there is a , this two term root mean square end to end distance and root mean square or radius of gyration are mathematically related .
So , if you find one , the other would be , you can get easily from that expression which both connects each other .
Now , out of these two , this radius of gyration is similar to almost like the radius , if you consider the polymer coil as sphere , if you consider coils as a sphere then this radius of gyration is similar to or proportional to the radius of this sphere .
So , the solution properties of the polymer chain and light scattering behavior as well is mostly dictated by the radius of gyration value ; and is also useful , if you have more than one ends like if you have branched polymer then you have more than two ends , then which , end to end distance is not existing .
Now , which end will take .
So , in that case or if you have a cyclic polymer where there is no ends , then end to end distance is also not possible .
So , in those cases , it is useful to use the radius gyration is more useful ; whereas , in there , the root mean square end to end distance is more useful for describing the rubber elasticity behavior of a polymer coil .
So , the radius of gyration gives more , or gives the solution , the solution behavior of polymer coil is mostly dependent on the radius of gyration , where the rubber elasticity is covered by the root mean square end to end distance .
Now , we , let us find out the size of a simplest molecular model .
Now , what we will first consider , we now want to find out this values , or these values , now if we can find one of them , we know that both these are related mathematically .
So , you can find this easily , the other one .
Now , you mainly calculate , how you find information about these and we will know the expression for this and then find out what is relation in how to get this .
Now , let us first consider the simplistic , very simple model where you have freely jointed chain with no restriction .
So , if you have bonds you can have , you have no restrictions .
So , if you consider this as a one bond then the other bond , you can place anywhere without having any restriction of bond angle or the rotational restriction between them .
So , this is given by , for this the model is developed and that is again , which is just mentioned is the expression for this chain is given by random walk model , which was first developed for the movement of ideal gas ; but here the difference is that , in case of ideal gas , the steps , the gas molecules can take , this does not matter , you can take any value .
But in this case , the each step the polymer can take or the bond can take is the length of the bond .
So , you can start from one point , one end and just put the other randomly of course , the chain length the length of the each bond has to be equal .
So , you can place , I am placing this randomly .
So , you start from one end and you continually adding the further bonds in 3 D specific way , just showing a two d picture here , where you imagine this is in three dimensional .
So , this is how the random of model is designed .
So , what is , again , continue in a random way .
So , one end is here .
So , what the model do , you put make a three dimensional coordinate , where the one end is placed as the origin of this coordinate and this is r from the what is found is what is the probability of the other end , be at distance of r from the origin .
The way this model works is that you put the chain end at the origin of the 3 D coordinate and found out what is the probability that the other chain end would be at distance of r from the origin ; say , if you put this x y z , then the probability of that the other end would be at point x y z which is having a distance r from the origin would be given by , right .
This is , this is probability density function which is the probability unit per volume .
So , you are considering one volume , you need volume at a distance r and you are finding out what is the probability of that volume have the other end .
When n is large , of course r is the end to end distance much lower than nl , we have this equals to , we have this expression for this , we have this where beta is.. ... Now , here we are considering one unit volume , in this place .
Now , there could be other points which are also having the same distance r ; you can have other values r across this three d coordinate .
So , you cannot only consider unit volume , you need to consider the volume element at distance r from , say you are not considering one point , you are considering the entire volume element which is having distance r from the origin where you find the probability of ending the other chain end .
And that can be written as… So , we are adding a volume element here with radius of r , 4 pi r squared d r is the volume element .
So , you are finding the probability of , this is the probability distribution function .
So , total probability of finding the chain , other chain end at a distance r would be the probability distribution function multiplied by the volume element .
And this one is w r is then given by… This is radial distribution function and the other case it was Gaussian distribution function .
Now , by this , you may not have to remember all this approach , unless you are extremely interested to know the logic behind to get the final expression .
Now , what I am trying to understand , how the approach , how , what the theoretical approach is made to find out the end to end distance , root mean square end to end distance for a random coil ; and this is how it is made .
And finally , if we , if we neglect or ignore all the steps , we can , that is not required or we cannot have enough time to complete that what we can write that it will finally give the end to end distance like this .
So , if you from these expressions , you finally get an expression , you remember this or you do not have to remember all the steps unless you are required , unless you are interested very much .
Now , if this subscript f , we are mentioning for a freely rotated chain or a freely jointed chain , freely jointed chain ; that means , it does not , freely jointed chain does not have any restriction or bond angle and bond protection .
Now , as I said that fortunately there is a relation for large n and for linear molecule .
We can write , this is your radius of gyration .
So , with this ratios , it can be shown that if you know this .
So , for if you put f here , if you put f here .
So , freely rotating chain , we can get this expression .
So , by writing for a simple , for a simple model , the molecular model , freely jointed chain for no restriction , we now shown that using Gaussian distribution function or random coil approach , it can be shown that the , it shows this , it has this relation ; which means that coil dimensions will be significantly lesser than the contour length , if you have a molecule of say 10000 units 10000 repeating units .
So , if you have polyethylene molecule with 10000 repeating units , each carbon - carbon length is 1.54 Armstrong .
So , the contour length would be multiplied this by the number of bonds .
So , it will be less than one intrusions by knowing that .
So , it will be contour length ; whereas , your r m s end to end distance would be 154 Armstrong which is 100 lower than contour length , and that is coming from this n to the power half term .
So , because you have 10000 units , you are getting 100 times lower value of the contour or r m s end to end distance .
Now , you seen that it can be shown that the radius of gyration can be found from the r m s , root mean square , the r m s end to end distance ; and as I said earlier , the r m s end to end distance is useful for our elasticity and the radius of gyration useful for directly relevant to dilute solution properties and light scattering and it can also useful for branched molecules and cyclic molecules .
Now let us , that is not practical , you know , the chain without a restriction , bond angle restriction or bond rotational restriction without is physically unrealistic .
So , every real polymer chain will have restriction of bond angle and also restriction for the single rotation around the single bond .
So , there are actually three restrictions , bond angle restriction , short range restriction , restriction which is coming from the single bond rotational restriction , and there is also long range steric interaction , and excluded volume effect which will , which we will encounter 1 by 1 and see how the dimension or the size of the polymer changes , this should be size not shape .
So , all this will put in a , all this restriction one after on , found and then r m s end to end distance varies , and once we know the end to end distance and always find the radius of gyration .
Now , let us first consider these two bond angle restriction and short range rotational restriction .
Now , let us consider first a single bond ; the simple bond , one bond , if you one bond like this ; now , the other one , in case of freely rotating , in case of freely rotating chain , you can place it here , you can place it here , or even you can place it here .
There is no restriction bond angle , or you can do it in a 3 d , I am just showing a 2 d matrix .
So , you can place the other bond here , 180 degree or 90 degree or even 0 degree , there is no , there is no restriction of bond angle , in this case ; and as I said , I am just showing a two dimension here a thing , imagine you can think of three dimension as well .
So , what would have been the average , if all this 0 to 180 degree is equally probable , then what would be the time average ?
Time would have been 90 degree .
So , this would have been the time average value .
So , what would have been the end to end distance ?
It would be from this end to this end , this would have been the end to end distance .
Now actually , in case of carbon - carbon bond , what is the bond angle ?
This is the time average , there was no restriction of bond angle ; in case actual , you have no 90 degree , you have this 109.5 degree , tetrahedron bond angle , then your actual molecule bond angle would look like this .
So , the end to end distance , which was earlier this , now it will become this .
So , because of this restriction , you can now understand that the end to end distance or time average end to end distance , root mean square end to end distance will increase from here to here .
So for this restriction , you will have increase in the root mean square end to end distance .
Now , it can clearly be shown , the these value where the writing f a which is angle restriction from one angle is coming , we are writing these , it can be shown that 1 minus cos theta , it can be shown that… Now , in most cases the carbon - carbon bond are the bonds , theta is between 90 degree and 180 degree , so cos theta is less than 0 ; so obviously , r square f a would be greater than r square absolute .
Thus , we have just seen from the freely rotating bond .
So , this is the expression which now we got from the angle restriction ; what we will be the next lecture ?
We will impose the second restriction and see how this dimension changes .
The analysis of continuous immobilized enzyme reactors interms of their performance has been based on the kinetics of the enzyme reactions .
We have considered the reactions that follow Michaelis Menten kinetics , the reactions that follows substrate inhibition or product inhibition ; we also considered approximation with respect to zero order and first order reaction regimes in the case of enzyme catalyzed reactions .
Then we have looked at the effect of mass transfer on the reactor performance by virtue of steady state analysis of mass transfer and biochemical reaction taking place simultaneously in an enzyme reactor .
In all these analyses we have assumed that the flow pattern in the reactor is either perfectly mixed that is the contents of the reactor are homogeneously mixed without any stagnant ……. .. or without any dead pockets in the reactor or alternatively in the case of plug flow reactor the velocity profile of all the fluid streams are flat and it can be described by a ideal plug flow behavior .
Although this kind of situation is practically feasible in a laboratory experiment where you can have a very high height to diameter ratio and have a very uniform packing in the reactor so that the plug flow characteristics are realized in the laboratory but on a large scale reactor which are real industrial reactors the possibility of achieving the ideal flow patterns that means either a complete perfect back mix or a perfect plug flow reactor are usually far from reality and most of the reactors operate closer to the one of the regimes but also have a partly mixed behavior .
Today we will like to look as at how this deviation in the ideal flow behavior influences the reactor performance .
How to approach the situation incase if the flow behavior is not ideal interms of perfectly well back mix or a plug flow behavior .
Very often we must realize that the causes of deviation from the ideality are because of certain stagnant reasons in the case of reactor .
For example if you consider a plugflow reactor which has been separated by certain horizontal …. .. just to allow a proper mass transfer there might be certain stagnant reason from the corners or in the case of back mix reactors if the impeller is not properly designed or the mixing pattern is not properly designed there might be some region in the whole reactor where the mixing is not uniform and the idea of completely back mix is not realized .
Alternatively there might be some channeling effect .
For example in the packed bed reactor if the particles are not of uniform size and the packing is not uniform there might be some channeling with the result that a part of the fluid stream which is getting into the reactor passes through unreacted and therefore the performance can deteriorate .
Then there might be short circuiting , something like channeling or bypassing also can take place in the case of a stirred vessel .
In all the situations the performance of the reactor is lowered compared to what we look for by analysis in the case of an ideal fluid flow pattern .
An alternative situation in enzyme reactor is that sometimes we tend to develop reactor designs for various reasons because of the requirement of the reactions .
In the case of recycle reactor as you notice here although it ’ s a packed bed reactor but just to increase the linear flow velocity to overcome the external film diffusion we may like to have a recycle stream so that the linear flow velocity is increased but ultimately it will end up in non - ideality from the plug flow behavior .
Similarly in the case of a fluidized bed reactor , we also have the same thing just to improve the mass transfer and heat transfer effects in the case of a reactor , the particles are fluidized by the substrate to the extent that the particles are not thrown out of the reactor ; they are retained in the reactor but the voidage increases to a level that they remain fluidized in the reactor and even in this case in terms of flow behavior , the flow behavior will be some where in between the plug flow as well as the packed bed reactor .
In another case if you look at the combined CSTR and ultra filtration reactor which is one of the model system which has been used for substrate which are solid in nature and where enzyme is required to be used in soluble form one can carry out the reaction in stirred reactor , in a CSTR , with the possibility of the product stream passing through a ultra filtration chamber where by the enzyme is the recycled back and the product is withdrawn from the permeate stream .
In this case also the reactor although theoretically one has to consider it closer to CSTR , but in performance if you look at , it has revelation from the CSTR because the concentration profile in the whole reactor does not remain ideally perfect .
Similarly we have systems like hollow fiber reactor , as we discussed earlier , in which case the enzyme is entrapped in one of the side of the tubes and substrate is passed from the other side and the two sides are permeable that means they are separated by semi - permeable membrane and the reaction can take place and the product stream can go .
Although the system is designed to mimic or at least operate closely to a plug flow reactor , still the actual performance may be slightly inferior than a plugflow behavior and it might have some kind of a back mixing , partly back mixing .
Another very important industrial reactor which has been used is a spiral wound , multipore , biocatalytic module .
If you recall that the immobilized enzyme preparation is in the form of a thin long membrane film which is wrapped around a central core and the enzyme membrane is also separated by a wire mesh or some kind of a solid support so that the mechanical strength improves and this spiral wound module is then instead into the column whereby the substrate is fed from one of the end and the reactor can be operated as in a packed bed mode .
But the spiral wound module operates some where closer to only closer to plug flow behavior reactor and not exactly as a plug flow reactor .
The extent of non - ideality in the case of a flow pattern , the first parameter is that we must be able to identify the extent of non - ideality in the case of an enzyme reactor .
If we can understand or arrive by some means the distribution of the residence times of the various element of a fluid which is passing through a reactor with respect to time and that distribution can give us an idea about the extent of flow pattern .
That means if the distribution , if it passes almost like a plug flow behavior or like a CSTR one can then compare the two patterns and see whether the flow pattern in the actual reactor is ideal or what is the extent of ideality .
This analysis to monitor the deviation from the ideality for enzyme reactor in flow pattern is mediated by what we call as residence time distribution .
It gives you the distribution of the various elements of the fluid passing through a reactor .
That means the age of various elements in a fluid stream from the reactor interms of age distribution that means what is the duration of the time which each element of the fluid has stayed in the reactor .
That is the residence time and this if in all cases same as in the case of a space time then it should be an ideal reactor .
If it deviates and the …. .. distribution or a residence time distribution is given in the form of …. .. verses time distribution and one can say that if this is the total … .
distribution for any given fluid element from a reactor then your zero to infinity Edt is equal to one .
If you just consider a very small element in this distribution having the age between t and dt and t and t + dt then the fraction of the exit stream of age between t and t + dt will be Edt and this fraction integrated over infinite time will give you the total fluid which is flowing through the reactor and the …… .
distribution is defined that the total area under the curve is unity .
If you consider any fraction at time t1 , the fraction of the exit stream which has age less than t1 will be zero to t one Edt ; the fraction of the exit stream which has age younger than t1 .
Age means the time spent by an element of the fluid in the reactor vessel .
On the other hand the fraction of the exit stream which is older than the t1 will be t one to infinity Edt or this will be one minus zero to t1 Edt because the total zero order infinity is one .
This residence time distribution experimentally for a given reactor system can give you an idea about the nature of non - ideality of a reactor system in terms of flow behavior .
Mind it that non - ideality may also be caused by other reasons like mass transfer , partitioning or variety of other reasons that we have discussed but this non - ideality we are talking exclusively in terms of the flow behavior .
This residence time distribution is usually determined in the experimental reactors by what we know as stimulus response techniques .
In this technique usually a tracer which is an inert material is put along with the feed stream .
Mind the word that you need an inert tracer which can be detected .
Detection is important because if you cannot detect this inert tracer , it doesn ’ t serve any purpose .
Very often a dye can be used provided the dye does not interfere in the reaction or it doesn ’ t get adsorbed in the carrier material .
An inert dye can be used as a tracer system and by calorimetry it can be estimated or alternatively in the case of enzyme catalyzed reaction any other reactant or any other sugar or any other material , chemical species which will not take part in the reaction can be inserted or which should be possible to analyze at the ….. ... Very often some time one ends up in a difficult situation in choosing a good tracer .
Then in that case radioactive material could be also used as tracers so that they can be monitored at the exit stream by measurement of simple radioactivity by the counters .
After inserting you can insert any kind of feed stimulus ; it can be a step input , it can be a delta input or it can be even a random input , doesn ’ t make a difference .
Various types of inputs can be given and ultimately at the end of it we need to monitor the response of the tracer in the exit stream mid time and the record of this gives you a picture of the residence time distribution .
That is what usually is followed .
A variety of types of tracer inputs are inserted into the vessel .
Consider this is a vessel .
We put a tracer input signal or what we call as a stimulus .
It can be a random input in any fashion ; you allow some quantity of tracer to be inserted randomly and notice the output which will also be random depending on the flow profile .
Then it can be a cyclic input in the waveform and then output also will be some type of a cyclic output .
Then we can have a step input that means initially the tracer concentration is set at zero and then it is raised or suddenly after a time t , after some time it is in the feed stream continuously you supply a tracer let us say concentration one , hundred percent and then this input again in the reaction vessel will come out in the case of a exponential behavior .
Alternatively you can also give a pulse input also called as delta input where over a very short period of time that means your ?
t approaching zero you provide a small quantity of a tracer and then monitor the output .
Theoretically the product in a plug flow reactor must come out exactly after the residence time of the feed stream but very often because of the deviation from the ideality of plug flow behavior it might come out almost in a slightly broad zone .
Some of you must have done chromatographic experiments .
Very often broadening of the output is one of the major problems .
The theoretical chromatographic adsorption column must operate as a plug flow column but ultimately because of certain non - ideality there is some kind of broadening .
That means the fraction which you are interested is distributed over a period of time .
Ideally it should come out in a very short period of time like we have put it here but it comes out in a broadened fashion .
Although I have mentioned that any kind of input can be given but for analytical convenience we often resort to either a step input or a pulse input because ultimate analytical solutions might be difficult and the step input and pulse input are commonly used technique for analyzing or getting the residence time distribution .
The response of a step input of the tracer is usually called as F curve .
That means the F is equal to C / C0 .
If initial concentration is zero and C / C0 goes to one that means the concentration of the tracer is C0 and C / C0 is one and this is given over a period of time .
Ultimately its response you get something like this with the average mean residence time of t bar .
This is time and F is C / C0 .
Here F is equal to zero to t Edt and over a period of time this continues and dF / dt is the ……. .. distribution the differential of the function f C / C0 .
On the other hand the response of a delta input is called C curve .
In fact we normalize it to get the response .
For example normalization in this case is C bar is equal to C / Q if Q is the total quantity of a stimulus given and then its response is monitored over the period of time and Q is the total quantity of the input that is given and therefore zero to infinity C bar dt is equal to zero to infinity C / Q.dt .
We plot as C bar is equal to C / Q , the fraction of the total tracer which has been put in which emerges at any time given t and that is equal to C / Q.dt will be equal to one or Q is equal to zero to infinity C bar dt .
C is the concentration of the tracer which is in the output stream at any given time t and Q is the total quantity of tracer that has been put in .
For example here you are not putting continuously you are putting only in one shot .
Say for example you are putting one gram of some inert dye into the reactor initially and after that you monitor its output response .
This one gram theoretically if it is an ideal plug flow , it should come out in a short period of time in as much time as it has been fed in .
But it will not emerge in one go it will come out in small lots .
If you analyze the output stream over a period of time and let us say you get such a profile and where this profile interms of the C which is output concentration at any given time t divided by the total quantity which has been fed in a normalized way and that is C bar and C / Q is the normalized concentration of the tracer output in the exit stream and the C / Q verses t gives you a C curve .
This shows the performance of a plug flow reactor as a response to a pulse input .
In the case of F curve , the C0 is the maximum concentration and that concentration is reached instantaneously .
Up to some time there is no concentration of tracer ; suddenly at a given time we start a stream continuing the tracer and so here it becomes C0 .
If C / C0 is one and from then onwards the input is same and the output stream theoretically after a time t it should also come out in a constant stream but it doesn ’ t come out in constant stream .
There is a kind of transient phase till it reaches to the constant stream and that is what it defines .
This tracer information can be used directly or in conjunction with the flow model to predict the performance of the real flow reactors .
Theoretically the ideal reactor performance we have been looking at interms of the reaction kinetics .
That means we develop a mass balance equation for a particular reactor , apply the reaction kinetics and analyze the equation and get the final reactor performance equation interms of tow verses the fractional conversion or the remaining substrate concentration in the reactor .
These …… distribution also can be used to determine the reactor performance based on the flow profile along with the reaction kinetics .
Reactor performance from RTD also can be obtained and one can compare if you consider the ideal reactor flow profile and also the real reactor flow profile and compare their performance and comparison will give you the deviation from the ideality .
If you look at the C curve which is very commonly used for analysis of packed bed reactor , in the case of a C curve on the basis of the flow pattern the mean concentration of the substrate in the exit stream will be equal to the sum of all this elements of the exit stream for concentration of substrate remaining in an element of age t + dt into the fraction of exit stream which is of age t + dt .
That means if you take a differential element of the fluid stream which passes through time dt , whatever the concentration of substrate in that stream which is passing through time dt multiplied by the fraction of the exit stream which is of age between t and dt and t + dt , and sum it over the all the elements .
This is the concentration of the substrate in one element of the age dt between t and t + dt and the fraction of the exit stream which is half the age between t + dt that means during the time dt and if you multiply the two you get the mean concentration of substrate in the exit stream and if you sum it up this one over all the elements or integrate it S bar will be equal to t equal to zero to infinity S element into Edt .
This is the fraction of stream Edt ; this is the concentration of substrate remaining in the element .
This Sel is element concentration of substrate remaining in the element which is of age t + ?
t and this is the fraction Edt .
These two terms indicate the concentration term as well as the age term in the reactor .
The mean substrate concentration in the reactor will be given by this .
If you write for a first order kinetics Sel will be equal to Sel = S0e - kt You can assume this K is V ’ m / K ’ m , a first order rate constant for the enzyme reaction and you can also write therefore here S bar from the RTD data will be equal to S0 ?
e - Kt.Edt What it amounts to is that if you have a residence time distribution for any real reactor in the form of Edt and if you also have the rate constant K , the first order rate constant which can be evaluated for enzyme reaction and you can get all the reaction fraction of the exit stream which has been collected and sum it over , it will give the mean age distribution , the mean substrate concentration in the exit stream .
Normally a residence time distribution , a C curve will be of this type .
In practice what we do is if we operate a reactor we are making feed from the bottom at some concentration S0 .
This is S .
Suddenly at any given time t a tracer is inserted into the reactor in the feed stream by short period of time and the concentration is monitored in the exit stream .
At time t = 0 , 5 at equidistant time if you determine the concentration of the tracer whatever values come at equidistant time , they are plotted in terms of C / Q .
That means you consider the SC ?
t = Q .
Here is also a check that this SC ?
t = Q of all the data must be equal to the actual quantity of tracer which has been put in .
If there is any absorption of some tracer into the system or some reaction taking place or if the tracer is not a good choice that means either it is participating in the reaction .
In that case the total amount of tracer which has been put in to the reactor will not be equal to SC ?
t and such an analysis is erroneous in nature .
It should not be accepted for determining the flow behavior and once you checked that the total quantity of tracer which has been put in matches with the tracer quantity which has come out in the output stream , which is SC ?
t and then one can substitute or write down the integration term in terms of S0 ?
e - Kt.Edt and sum it over , you will get the concentration of the substrate remaining unreacted in the exit stream as a function of flow behavior and reaction kinetics .
On the other side the same performance can also be judged by purely kinetic analysis .
That means in the case of plug flow reactor tow is equal to S0 0 to x dx / K.S ; classical balance equation which gives you the performance of a plug flow reactor and from this one can write S = S0e - Kt .
That means because in the case of first order reaction there will be an exponential consumption of substrate with time and therefore if one takes a real data of a particular plug flow reactor based on kinetic analysis and based on experimental value , this will be actually based on the experimental data .
Sometime one finds that there is a large deviation .
That means this performance will be inferior than this one if the reactor is not an ideal plug flow .
If it is an ideal plug flow , the closeness of these values S as well as S bar will indicate the ideality of the reactor flow pattern .
But in case there is deviation one will find quite different values and the actual reactor performance will be judged by the reactor performance based on the …… distribution and kinetics .
If you consider the characteristics F curves for different kinds of flow profiles , in the case of ‘ a ’ curve you have a typical F curve for a plug flow reactor .
That means as soon as the tracer concentration in that plug flow reactor has been inserted after time t or Qt / V or one residence time , the tracer must come out in the same concentration in the case of a step input .
In the case of a plug flow with some …… mixing that means a non - ideal plug flow , the behavior instead of being like this , it may be something like this .
The output becomes instead of vertically … .
a curved one , the deviation of this from the vertical absorption gives the non - ideality .
In the case ‘ c ’ , this is the performance with the perfect mixing .
An exponential output of the tracer from the reactor .
After time zero as soon as you put in the tracer , there will be a dilution or mixing taking place and the tracer will get diluted and from zero concentration it will come to a concentration finally all the tracer will come out .
On the other hand if there is a mixing with some dead zones , some stagnant zones again the mixing pattern might get unchanged .
So these are the two non - ideal flow patterns and these are the two for plug flow as well for well mixed conditions the exit age distribution in terms of F curve .
Earlier we have seen the use of ‘ C ’ curve for getting the reactor performance .
If you want to identify or detect the deviation from ideality using the ‘ F ’ curve then consider a CSTR , a continuous stirred tank reactor and give a step change in the concentration of tracer in the feed stream .
Consider a stirred reactor of constant volume V where the substrate is put , the product stream is coming out and the step input is added here at a concentration C0 and the flow velocity is Q .
Therefore the total mass balance that is QC0 = QC + Vdc / dt That means the C will also start coming out here at a flow rate of Q .
There will be some change in the rate of change of concentration of C in the reactor .
Therefore this can be integrated to give C / C0 = 1 - exp ( - Qt / V ) This is the theoretical output for a step change in a CSTR .
If you make a plot of this curve a semi logarithmic plot that means ln C / C0 or ln 1 - C / C0 verses time you will end up with a slope of Q / V and intercept of ln 1 that is zero .
For an ideal reactor such kind of response is obtainable .
If you assume that there is some kind of deviation from ideality and in the case of CSTR the kind of deviation could be of two types .
One is that there is some kind of a non - mixing or part of the stream which is being fed here , Q is going unmixed .
This is 1 - f1 , f1 is going to the reactor for mixing .
This is volume V and the fraction f1of the total stream Q is going into the reactor .
The 1 - f1 fraction is getting channeled or bypassed from the mixing pattern and therefore one is losing .
Another source of non - ideality could be that the reactor may have some kind of dead zone because of the improper mixing and this dead zone is V.f2 .
The fraction f2 of the total volume of the reactor is represented as a dead zone .
There mixing is not taking place .
If you write a mass balance for such a system then you will get f1.Q.C0 .
We are putting C0 as step input of tracer .
f1.Q.C0 = f1.Q.C + f2.V dc / dt f1.Q.C is the fraction which will come out ; f2.V is the one which is dead zone .
In the case of a non - ideal system which incorporates a fraction of the feed stream which is directly channeled out into the exit stream and another fraction of the total volume of the reactor which is almost like a dead zone and does not participate in the reaction process .
No . This f2 is the fraction of total volume which is stagnant .
Here the f2 is not of the total feed stream .
Of the total feed stream f1 has come into the reactor and 1 - f1 has gone untouched from the reactor .
Of the total volume of the reactor V , a fraction f2 is a dead zone .
Yeah we have now because we have a dead zone .
Okay . Then we can write probably this is 1 - f2 the total of the active volume and this becomes f2.V .
So the total fraction f2 is well mixed and so ( 1 - f2 ) .V is the dead zone .
So the rate of concentration will be f2.V dc / dt .
Is that right ?
f2 is the fraction which is in the mixed zone as per this mass balance .
So 1 - f2 is the dead zone and therefore if you integrate this equation you will get C / C0 = exp ( - f1Qt / f2V ) This can be combined with the outflow stirred equation that means the mass balance equation .
That is F ( t ) = C / C0 = ( 1 - f1 ) + exp ( - f1Qt / f2V ) If you plot this profile …… .
distribution C / C0 , you will get a different kind of a profile from which the parameters f1and f2 can be calculated .
The slope will be - f1 / f2 .
If you plot Qt / V verses C / C0 the slope will be - f1 / f2 minus and the intercept will be ln C / C0 .
The input in the reactor going is only f1Q .
This is not going to the reactor .
This is the actual input to the reactor and this is the exit stream which is going f1QC and this undergoes change in the concentration .
Therefore by comparing the two profiles you can see the order of deviation the dead zone and the mixed stream in the reactor has gone into performance .
That is to illustrate the use of residence time distribution in the case of a real reactor which can be used to determine the reactor performance and such a reactor performance then can be used to calculate or correct the actual performance based on the kinetics data .
This is one way to account for the non - ideal flow .
The other way to handle is to develop the full flow models which can vary in degree of complexity depending upon where you can either consider the dispersion as a parameter and thereby you can write dispersion mass balance equations based on dispersion and finalize the reactor performance equation .
Alternatively you can also consider as a like a tangent series model because a plug flow reactor or plug flow pattern can be considered as a infinite number of CSTR in series and plug flow can be considered as a CSTR in series and if you can calculate based on the reactor performance , the number of CSTR in series as equivalent to the plug flow that can quantify the reactor performance .
Their order of complexity increases on the basis of the number of parameters considered .
But even the residence time distribution can give you reasonably good idea of the non - ideality of the flow based on which one can even monitor the reactor performance and use that information particularly for scaling it up when you want to go on a larger scale reactor .
We will stop at this point .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
In this lecture , we will continue our discussion on chain copolymerization , which we began in the last lecture and the lecture before .
Now , we have talked about different types of copolymers , random copolymers , copolymers , alternate copolymers , block copolymers .
Then , we talked about importance of copolymerization in last lecture , how we can improve the property of an existing homo polymer by introducing another co - monomer in the polymer .
Then , we talked about copolymer composition equation .
We applied simple model of terminal model , where we basically we are talking about how the composition of copolymer can be predicted from the reaction , reactivity monomer reactivity ratios .
We started our discussion on different types of copolymerization .
Then as a result of different types of copolymerization , what are the different types of copolymer micro structure possible ?
We started and we are half way in that discussion .
So , we will start from this today and then move on to composition drift in a copolymer as we go on increasing the conversion in the copolymerization reaction .
Then , monomer reactivity , how it depends on the different modes of chain initiation and then talk about effect of structure on reactivities , mainly in radical copolymerization .
We will discuss Q - e scheme and then briefly discuss the ionic copolymerization .
Then , invariably we will talk about application of the copolymers , we are talking about .
Now , we continue the discussion we are having in last lecture .
You know we have talked about different types of copolymers .
For example , we have talked that in first case , if your r 1 r 2 is 1 is gives us ideal copolymerization .
Now , this happens if the monomers have very similar structures and most of the ionic polymerizations also follow this type of behavior .
There is a special case , which where both r 1 r 2 are 1 .
In that case , we have seen that F 1 is mole fraction of the monomers same as the mono fractions in the feed .
We have seen the second type , where this product is equals to 0 and which gives towards alternate copolymerization .
As a special case , where r 1 r 2 both are 0 is perfect alternate copolymer , where basically f 1 , so as f 2 is 0.5 .
The closer this ratio r 1 r 2 to 0 , it is the resulting copolymer will be more towards alternate .
Now , we will talk about the third option possible , where r 1 multiplied by r 2 is neither 0 nor neither 1 .
Now , this is first possibility , where one of the monomer reactivity ratios is more than 1 .
Another would be obviously less than 1 .
It could be the other way as usual .
It could be r 1 could be less than 1 or r 2 could be less than 1 .
Usually these products , this product is less than 1 .
In some cases , they are slightly above 1 and possible and in the usual copolymer reaction .
Now , in this case , what happened ?
The F 1 versus no monomer the ratio of polymer composition is versus monomer composition curve is similar to ideal copolymerization , but skewed , but skewed towards the composition of the copolymer richer in the repeat unit resulting from the more reactive monomer .
So , it is similar to the ideal composition copolymerization .
If I plot F 1 with f 1 , in case of ideal , we have seen that is r 1 is r 2 is equal to 1 .
This is r 1 greater than 1 , r 2 less than 1 .
What r 1 r 2 is equal to 1 ?
Now , if this is not equals to 1 and if r 1 is the more reactive monomer compared to r 2 , M 1 is the more reactive monomer compared to M 2 , and then it will be skewed .
This was for ideal .
Then , it this will be skewed towards , it will be skewed towards the more reactive monomer .
The higher this ratio , this r 1 by r 2 , the higher this ratio of r 1 r 2 , the higher the longer is the continuous sequence of M 1 type monomer in the copolymer and shorter is the sequence of the M 2 , M 2 monomer .
So , if this is higher means the M 1 will have a longer sequence in the copolymer , and M 2 you have a shorter sequence in the co monomer .
In extreme case , if r 1 is very high and r 2 is very , very low , then the tendency would be to make consecutive homo polymers because this is very high .
Then , you will get something like and r 2 is very small .
So , in some cases , you might get M 2 getting in and then again may be one more at M 2 .
So , basically M 1 will have a much higher tendency to more polymerize , whereas M 2 has little tendency to move polymerize .
Whatever tendency it has to react , it will make copolymer towards copolymer .
So , if the situation is like this , then you are going to get a polymer like this , which is essentially a homo polymer because it is mostly M 1 with sometime M 2 here and there entering in the copolymer .
Example is that styrene and vinyl acetate .
I write VA .
The ratio of reactivity ratios are r 1 if this is M 1 , this is M 2 .
r 1 is 55 in case of radical polymerization and r 2 is 0.01 .This is for a radical polymerization .
So , basically styrene have much higher tendency to homo polymerize compared to copolymerized with vinyl acetate , where as vinyl acetate has very little tendency to homo polymerize .
So , you will get essentially homo polymer of styrene at the beginning at the beginning .
Then once the styrene is consumed , and then you will get the homo polymer of vinyl acetate .
Now , the second options in this case would be where r both both r 1 is less than 1 and r 2 is less than 1 .
Now , obviously r 1 r 2 is less than 1 , both not equals to 0 .
Now , this because both of these are less than 1 , so both of these monomers have a tendency to more tendencies to copolymerize compared to homo polymers .
As a result , there would be tendency to towards alternation rather than forming homo polymers .
F 1 versus f 1 curve will cross ; F 1 is equal to f 1 curve line rather at one point , which corresponds to azeotropic mole fraction f 1 azo .
Now , again if I plot , so that is the line corresponds to F 1 is f 1 which happens when r 1 is equals to r 2 is equal to 1 .
Now , in this case , if both are less than 1 , you will get a line like this which will cross over in this point .
So , this composition is corresponding to f 1 azo .
Now , the term azeotropic mole fraction is coming because we know azeotrops were mole fraction of 2 liquids in vapor phase equals to the mole fraction of the 2 liquids in liquid phase .
Basically , the liquids , 2 liquids actually vaporized in the same mole fraction in the vapor phase .
So , here the composition in the free monomer is same as in the co - polymer , copolymer .
So , if you take a particular composition and polymerize , then we will get always the same concentration or same composition of the co - polymers .
Here and if I write this , so in this case , the M 1 now at this point , the copolymers and the feed compositions are same .
Co - polymers occur without changing the composition in the feed ratio .
That is why we call this as an azeotropic composition .
We can get these from our r d r expression we derived in the last lecture as this .
So , if you know the reactivity ratios r 1 r 2 , then we can get the azeotropic composition at which we can get an azeotropic co - polymerization .
So , if you do a co - polymerization starting for a composition monomer composition here , then the corresponding copolymerization will be termed as azeotropic co - polymerization .
Now , there is a third possibility in this set .
Here , you have both r 1 and r 2 greater than 1 .
Obviously , r 1 r 2 would be greater than 1 .
Now , in this is very rare .
It is not very usual thing observed for a monomer pair , but if that is the case , then both the monomer has a greater tendency to homo polymerize compare to copolymerize .
So , these would be having tendency towards block copolymer formation .
Now , basically we have covered almost all possibilities of different combination of r 1 and r 2 values .
Now , let us see how these different types of copolymers would result in a variation in composition .
So , how this different set of values of r 1 r 2 , how that would be changing the combination of our copolymer composition with conversion ?
Now , if we take say an ideal copolymerization where r 1 r 2 is 1 if r 1 is higher than 1 and r 2 is less than 1 , then 2 monomers will get into the chain in random fashion , but monomer M 1 will be entering in the chain at the faster rate as compared to M 2 .
This means in the beginning of the reaction , if we stop the copolymerization reaction , at this lower say less than 5 percent conversion , and then you will get a copolymer , which is having a higher mole fraction of the M 1 unit in the copolymer compared to that is in the feed .
So , as a result , what will happen ?
With time , with conversion , the monomer composition the monomer composition will have less and less M 1 because M 1 is getting incorporated in the chain in faster rate .
So , you will have a drift in drift in monomer composition with time .
As a result , you will get drift in the copolymer composition as well .
So , if you want to avoid this drift in copolymer composition , you should be restricting your copolymerization reaction to very lower level of conversion , so that the feed ratio the monomer ratio in the reaction medium does not alter too much compared to the feed ratio .
Now , if you compare the other cases like r 1 and r 2 is 0 .
Now , in this case because this is a more of an alternate copolymer as long as that more reactive monomer in this case say , r 1 is greater than 0 and r 2 is 0 .
As long as M 1 is remaining in the reaction medium , they will form alternate copolymer , but once M 1 is consumed , even if there are free M 2 present in the reaction medium , they cannot undergo homo polymerization because r 2 is 0 .
So , basically at the end in during the most of the reaction time , you will get same composition of the resulting copolymers .
At the end , if there are excess M 2 , you get free monomers .
If you start with excess M 1 , then at the beginning , you will get alternate copolymers .
When M 2 is getting over all the M 2 is getting incorporated in the copolymer chain , you will get rest of the M 1s , which is remaining .
They will homo polymerize .
So , you get an alternate copolymer at the beginning .
At the end , you get a homo polymer of M 1 .
If you talk about the case , we just talked about say r 1 less than 1 and r 2 is also less than 1 , what will happen ?
Look at this plot versus mole ratio mole percentage in the copolymer .
In the monomer , if you start from a composition here say , this point because M 1 is getting incorporated faster .
So , in this case , below this point before this point , M 1 is getting incorporated in the chain faster .
After this point , it is M 1 is getting incorporated in a slower rate .
So , what will happen if you start from this point ?
The M 1 will get incorporated in the chain at a much faster rate .
So , eventually , the concentration of M 1 in the reaction , M 1 monomer in the reaction will come down to 0 .
If you start a point somewhere above this point , then less fraction of M 1 would get into the chain .
As a result , slowly with combustion , the concentration of mole fraction of M 1 monomer in the chain in the reaction medium would be going to 1 .
So , in this case , you you actually go through with composition , where M 1 in the M 1 the mole fraction of M 1 in the reaction medium either 0 or 1 .
So , accordingly , you will get drift in the copolymer composition as well .
So , these are the some examples , which we are , which you can which you can now convince that there is a tendency in this copolymer .
In the most , most cases except when r 1 is r 2 is equals to 1 or r 1 and r 1 r 2 is 0 .
In case of these cases , you have a drift in the composition as you increase the conversion or as the reaction progresses with time .
So , what is usually done in in practice industry in most of the applications is require that you cannot have this much of drift in the composition of your polymer sample .
There is a basically , there is a control over the composition in the entire polymer sample is required .
So , what is done in practice ?
Either you start the reaction from a known a feed ratio or stop the reaction at a very low conversion say less than 5 percent , but that is not very practical .
Then , you have to take out the polymer from that monomer mixture and restart the polymers and so on .
So , that is not very practical .
So , what is practically done is basically you you add the more reactive monomer , which is getting incorporated in the chain mass in a faster rate .
That monomer is added in a controlled manner in the reaction medium .
So , in effect , you basically fix or you you basically remain or maintain the feed ratio , the monomer of M 1 and M 2 unchanged during the inter polymerization so that the copolymer composition also does not change during the inter polymerization .
So , you basically get homogenous polymers .
Now , let us talk about that , monomer reactivity , reactivities and chain initiation .
Now , we have seen that the disc scheme what we have been talking till now is valid for radical initiation or ionic initiation , but this values , the set of values for r 1 and r 2 , they are almost independent for a radical initiated chain copolymerization , but the values of individual r 1 and r 2 could dramatically change if the mode of initiation is changed .
For example , if I take a set of monomer like say , let us take an example of styrene and MMA , methyl methacrylate radical .
They have more or less similar reactivity .
So , r 1 has 0.5 and r 2 is 0.44 .
So , if I plot that f 1 where M 1 is styrene .
F1 that is the line corresponds to F 1 is f 1 .
Now , in case of radical copolymerization of styrene and MMA , it would looks like something like this .
As you can see from this , r 1 is also less than 1 and r 2 is less than 1 , but their re - activities are not very different .
Now , if you do a cationic polymerization , then obviously styrene is much more reactive compared to MMA in a cationic polymerization .
So , you get a curve like this .
So , in case of cationic , r 1 is 10.5 and r 2 is 0.1 .
In case of an ionic , you get the other way round because in case of an ionic , the reactivity of methyl methaacrylate is much faster compared to styrene .
So , with this , this page shows that for a given radical reaction , you know this r 1 and r 2 values are almost same .
You know they do not change too much with reaction conditions like temperature and reaction medium , but if we have different chain initiation mode .
Then obviously the react monomer reactivity ratios will differ , will dramatically different , which depends on the stabilization of the resulting active center .
Obviously , for these ionic , this also may depend on the solvent polarity and the counter and so on .
Now , how do we determine this r 1 and r 2 experimentally we have been talking about ?
So , determination of or evaluation of reactivity ratios , so I write just like r .
Now , as we , as I mentioned earlier also that this expression is we talked about this expression in the last lecture .
It this is valid for no numerical number of set of monomers or pair of monomers irrespective of whether the initiation is done by radical or ionic .
So , we can use this expression and from that , we can actually get the value for r 1 and r 2 .
Now , this expression can be rearranged and written like this .
The same expression , which I just showed in the last page , we can simply do mathematical rearrangement and get an expression something like this .
Now , what is what can be done is basically you do several reactions .
Start with different f 1 values .
You take feed monomer ratio with different f 1 values and stop the reaction say less than 5 percent conversion and quantify the amount of mole fraction of the monomer unit present in the copolymer at the end of this 5 percent or when you stop the reaction .
You can do it by spectroscopic thing mix like enema , UV or IR or even for more sophisticated cases ; you can actually radio level the monomers .
Actually , from the radio activity measurements , you can actually get the incorporation of individual monomers in the copolymers .
Feed ratio , you can get from the like normal chromatographic analysis like h p as n g c .
So , what you have now for a different state of f 1 ?
You have values of capital F 1 .
So , you make a plot where you put these in y axis this one and put these in x axis .
So , the slope would give you r 1 and the intercept should give you r 2 .
So , that is one of the ways you can determine from experimental value , experiment different experiment with different feed ratio and stopping the reaction at low conversion and then measuring the mole fraction of different monomers in the copolymer , but this is a old method .
Now days , these are not practiced .
In the lab , there are more sophisticated statistical method and which are computerized .
They are used to determine r 1 and 2 .
We are not going into detail of those methods , but essentially , the concept or the principle of determining r 1 and r 2 is similar , where you do the reaction in different feed monomer ratios and then stop the reactions at low conversion and get the copolymer composition .
Then , do from that , you can get the reactivities of the monomer reactivity values of r 1 and r 2 .
Now , let us talk about the effect of structure monomer structure on reactivities or reactivity ratios .
Now , before I going to this , let us show you some number of just to say these are tabulated from known values .
Now , these are the some of the numbers of different r 1 , r 2 , r and their product as well .
So , for example , if you compare maleic anhydride and styrene , individual individual r 1 and r 2 , they are very close to 0 .
So , basically they do not have a tendency to homo polymerize when they are together .
So , there is is a tendency to copolymerize all the time .
Now , when the structures are quite similar like this tetra fluoro ethylene and ethylene or tetra fluoro ethylene and mono chloro tri fluoro ethylene , their structures are very similar .
So , their reactivity ratios are almost close to 1 .
So , they basically give a perfect ideal copolymerization .
If you take a case like acrylonitrile and butadiene , then this is this is a higher number .
This is a lower number .
So , butadiene acrylonitrile has more tendencies to homo polymerization and butadiene will have higher tendency to copolymerization .
So , you essentially get copolymer at the beginning .
They will be rich in the monomer may be right from acrylonitrile and once acrylonitrile is consumed , then you will get homo polymers of butadiene .
So , basically you can get this r 1 and r 2 numbers from any standard literature and from there , you can compare this r 1 r 2 values and their product to get idea about how about the reactivities of the different monomers and the resulting copolymer .
How the nature is , the microstructure of the copolymer from definite pair of monomers and the possible drift in the copolymer composition from these values of r 1 and r 2 .
Now , let us go back and see the effect of structure and reactivity .
Now , in case of radical , first talk about the radical reaction .
Now , in case of radical reactions , these copolymer reaction rates would depend on like resonance , resonance stability of the monomers or the substituent , which is present .
So , basically if I talk about the monomer like this , then the ability to of the Y group to stabilize any resulting radical and then polar polarity polar effect .
How these double bond is polarized , is it the electron deficient or electron rich and steric effect ?
Basically , it is steric effect of the substituent group .
Now , what is the reaction in a in a in a basically copolymerization or radical reaction ?
You have radical and you have that is reacting in monomer to form another radical .
So , if you want to compare reactivity of different monomer to a particle particular radical say , if you in this case , if I fix this radical , this polymer radical or propagating radical , let us fix this and then if I want to compare different monomers , how the reactions will look like ?
So , let us keep this intact and M 1 , this will lead to M 1 dot M 2 .
This will lead to M 2 dot .
So , what it essentially means ?
If you want to compare the reactivity of these different monomers , M 1 , M 2 , M 3 towards a particular radical , essentially dictate by the stability of these 3 propagating radicals .
If the propagating radical is more stable , then the reaction will go towards right hand side .
If it is not that stable , then reaction will not tend to go towards right hand side .
So , basically the reactivity of different monomers towards a particular particle towards a particular radical will depend on the stability of the resulting radical from that monomer .
So , higher the stability , higher is the reactivity .
So , if I want to rank different monomers , I have to rank according to their ability to stabilize .
So , if I write Y phi , this has very strong civilization effect on the radical .
Then , this follows the ability of these substituent groups to stabilize the radical generated from this monomer .
So , basically in this case , this has the least ability to stabilize a radical .
If Y is H or Y is OR , that has the least ability to stabilize this radical .
So , they have least reactivity towards a particular polymer radical .
Now , this has a very high ability to stabilize this radical .
So , they have a much higher reactivity towards a particular radical .
Now , if I want to compare the reactivity of the radicals , see if I want to compare reactivity of different radicals with a single monomer , then what it will give ?
So , in all the cases , it will produce the same radical .
So , the stability of this resulting propagating radical will be same .
Hence , the reactivity order of these different radicals towards a monomer will be inverse towards the stability of this radical .
So , the monomer which is or the radicals which is least stabilized , they will have the highest reactivity towards a particular monomer .
So , in this case , the order of reactivity of the radical will be exactly reverse for what we just solved for the reactivity of monomers towards a single radical .
So , one more time , this is this this order will follow for the reactivity of this monomers towards a given radical .
Now , the radicals from these monomers will have exactly the reverse order , when you compare their reactivity towards single monomers .
Now , let us compare some numbers .
This is the rate constant for radical monomer reactions for different monomers and different polymer radical .
So , if I compare different monomers with a particular radical say like styrene in this case or MMA in this case , so you will see that these numbers lower in this , which means the order of reactivity of these monomers following this order , which we just showed in the last page for a particular radical .
So , if you are doing reaction of this monomers towards say styrene radical , then they will follow this strength and the radicals towards a particular monomer , say like say acrylonitrile .
All the radicals will follow the reverse strength .
So , vinyl acetate will have the highest reactivity compared to the other polymer radicals for particular monomers .
So , in this case , if I take acrylonitrile , vinyl acetate has much higher reactivity compared to acrylonitrile and methyl methacrylate and styrene .
So , basically if I want to compare , differentiate where you have a stabilized radical and a not stabilized monomer , stabilized radical plus a stabilized monomer , a not stabilized radical and not stabilized monomer , not stabilized radical and a stabilized monomer .
Now , in this case , you have the highest reactivity , most stable monomer .
A stabilized monomer will have more reactivity towards a particular radical and radicals , which are unstabilized .
They will have higher reactivity towards a particular monomer .
So , the reactivity order would be this .
So , if you compare the reaction of styrene plus vinyl acetate , this radical form vinyl acetate high reactive and in this case , styrene monomer .
So , this is a vinyl acetate radical plus styrene monomer , vinyl acetate radical plus vinyl acetate monomer , styrene radical plus styrene monomer , styrene radical plus vinyl acetate monomer .
A stands for stabilize .
So , styrene is stabilized monomer and styrene radical generated from styrene is a stabilized radical .
So , this will have highest tendency .
So , if we have a vinyl acetate radical in the reaction medium , then it will always copolymerize .
If you have styrene radical in a medium , then it will always homo polymerize .
So , basically if you have a reaction radical reaction , radical copolymerization between styrene and vinyl acetate , these are the 2 products of the reaction propagating dominantly .
So , it will be homo polymers of styrene and some alternate of copolymer of vinyl and vinyl acetate and styrene .
That is why the reactivity ratios are so different .
M 1 is styrene and vinyl acetate is M 2 .
Now , these are these are all about steric resonance effect .
You can also have steric effect polar effect .
Let us talk about the polar effect first .
Now , if you have electron withdrawing groups like in the monomers like say COOR , CN or COR , you could have electron donating group like CH 3 , OR .
If your electron withdrawing group , then this double bond will be electron deficient .
So , basically there will be effectively positive and if you are electron donating group , basically it will be electron rich double bond .
So , if you have monomers which are very different in their polarity of the double bond , then they will tend to form alternate copolymers .
If you have similar polarity , then they will tend to form an ideal polymerization .
So , if I compare acrylonitrile and say methyl phenyl ketone , then they will have almost ideal polymerization copolymerization .
If you compare taking to different groups , where they are this electron deficient and this is electron rich , then they will tend to be forming alternate copolymers .
So , if you choose 2 sets monomer from 2 different sets , then they will form alternate copolymer .
If you choose monomers from same sets , then they will tend to form a ideal polymer .
You can have also steric effect affecting the monomer ratios .
For example , if you have like compare these two , this basically have very low reactivity because they are 1 , 2 substituent .
If you compare these with X and Y , then this steric does not play much role .
Then , the resonance stabilization actually raditive , when they are present in a same carbon atom whereas , they are 1 2 substituent , then steric actually have a very detrimental effect .
So , reactivity actually comes down very much .
Now , some cases , this polarity , this steric effect , the polarity effect actually can help in polymerize or we overcome the steric effects .
For example , if I take a monomer of this sort .
Like take maleic anhydride and stacked Sullivan .
Because of steric effect , these 2 individual monomers , they cannot homo polymerize because they are 1 2 substituent .
They are steric problem .
But , their polarity is different .
This is highly electron deficient and this is highly electron rich .
So , what happens ?
These polarity effects actually help them to form copolymer .
They will be from different groups as we mentioned from electron donating groups and withdrawing groups and one from electron donating groups .
So , you will have alternate copolymer forming just to give you some number about the steric effect .
If I take , let us keep that for time being .
Now , in case of radical polymerization , in radical copolymerization , the reactivity does not depend too much on the reaction medium .
However , if the because of the medium , if the availability of monomers are different , then they actually affect or they affect their availability in copolymerization .
As a result , you can get effective different composition , which is not predicting from their r 1 and r 2 values .
For example , if we have two monomers and then copolymerize them in ball power solution , then compare their copolymerization behavior in heterogeneous polymerization system like emulsions or suspension .
Then , what happens there is some time , there is a possibility that one of the monomers will preferably partition in the core for say emulsion polymerization .
If the partition is more for one of the particular monomer , then that monomer will be available for copolymerization more , than the other monomer .
So , basically increasing reactivity ratios may not be different .
But , because their availability in terms of copolymerization is different , as a result , their partition ability in the reaction point or the reactor , then the r 1 and y 2 might be different , r 1 and y 2 could be different if the monomer structure changes .
For example , if you have Carboxylic acid like acrylic acid and then compare its copolymerization behavior over acryl amide , then we change in ph of the medium .
If there is acidic ph , for example , ph 2 , then acrylic acid remain as COH and if it is a basic ph like ph 9 , then we have a COO minus group .
As a result , you have different monomers altogether .
You have the reactivity to be different , the r 1 and r 1 and r 2 values for acrylic acid would be different at different ph .
If there , the copolymer is not soluble in the resulting monomer , then also there could be a complicated behavior of the 2 reactivity ratios .
Now , what we are going to discuss next is the Q and e scheme .
Now , because all these , there are 3 different type of effectives .
We have just studied resonance effect and polarity effect and steric effect , which might alter the reactivities of the different monomers .
It is very difficult to predict .
They are very complicated .
They are very difficult to predict or estimate the reactivity ratios and as a result copolymer composition from given monomer structures .
So , what is done is a semi empirical scheme .
This Q e scheme , which basically takes care of the resonance stabilization and the polarity part and basically have values for different monomers and from that values , we can actually predict the copolymerization behavior of the 2 different pair of monomers .
Now , what we will do in the next lecture ?
We will start from this Q e scheme , briefly talk about this and briefly talk about the ionic copolymerization and very briefly on the application part of this copolymerization and start .
Now , in the second half of that lecture , we will start the rising opening polymerization .
Welcome back ; in this class , I will continue with the introduction of polymers .
I will begin with classification of polymers .
Now , at the very beginning , you should remember that there has not been or still there is no single method for polymer classifications , which is generally accepted , but I will do , I will list all the various ways of classifying polymers .
Now , I do not expect student to remember a question , how many ways a polymer can be classified , but students should be aware of the terminology , which are used in this various classifications , so that when they come across these terms , they should be able to relate the meaning of this term .
Let us start with the classifications .
Classifications can be done .
How ? Nowhere from a polymer is originated .
In the last class , I have said that polymers can be originated from a natural sources and I also said that those are minor class of polymers .
Majority of polymers are synthesized in the lab or in a plant from most cases , petroleum resources and some cases form natural resources .
Natural resource derived monomers .
So , we can classify as a synthetic polymers .
The polymers , we synthesize in the lab or we can classify as a natural polymers in which case , polymers come from nature .
For example , polysaccharides which represent cellulose , starch , cotton , biopolymers , proteins , nucleic acids , wool , silk and so on and say , natural rubber , cis - 1 , 4 - isopolyisoprene .
Some cases , we take these natural polymers , and we modify this polymer synthetically for a particular reason , for specific applications .
Those cases we can term those polymers as semi - synthetic or semi - natural in any of the ways .
So , third category could be semi - synthetic polymers , where chemically , which is chemically modified natural polymer .
Synthetic polymers can be classified as the organic polymers .
The polymers which are made from carbon , nitrogen , oxygen and hydrogen and as inorganic polymers , where beside this elements , carbon , hydrogen , nitrogen , oxygen , you have silicon , phosphorus , boron , sulphur , such elements in the polymer molecules for example siloxanes , silanes , silicon , phosphazenes .
These are the examples of inorganic polymers .
Synthetic polymers can be classified as homochain and hetrochain polymers as well .
Homochain polymers mean a polymer which has a backbone of only carbon CCC .
For example , polyethylene polypropylene , these are made of polymer .
The polymer chain consists of only CCC backbone , whereas in heterogen , in case of heterogen , besides carbon , you might have nitrogen , oxygen and other hetero atoms .
For example , nylon has nitrogen , oxygen along with carbon .
Polycarbonate has carbon plus oxygen in the backbone .
Polymers can be classified as according to the chain structure .
It can have linear chains like this .
It can have branch chains , like you have this linear polymer plus you have these branches .
You can have branches like this or you can have branches like this as well .
Now , the main difference between these three branches chain in all are that all of these three are called branch chain polymers .
In this case , the length of the branches is much smaller compared to the length between two branching points , whereas in this case , the length of the individual branches is comparable to the length between two branching points and in this case , branches also have sub branches .
So , in this case , we call this as short branched chain .
Short branch and this is long branch and this is hyper branch .
Now , special type of branching if you have polymer like this where branches is coming from a single point , you get a star polymer .
Now , you can also have network polymers .
For example , if I have different chains in polymers which are connected , covalently connected like this and so on , then this entire polymer is cross linked , so that this individual chain does not exist .
If you take , if you move one chain , the entire network will come along with it and this is called polymer network or network polymer .
Now , you can have a mixture of such networks .
In a same sample , you have mixture of .
If you have mixture of two networks , then this network will penetrate with each other and then , we call this as interpenetrating network .
If I just show in some colors , different colors , you can have two networks inter twingled each other .
So , you have interpenetrating network and in another case , you can have one of this network as link one of network along with long chain linear polymers .
In that case , we call that system as a semi - interpenetrating network , where one of the constituents is linear chain polymer and another one is network polymers .
So , in that case , we call as a semi - interpenetrating and when both or more than one networks are inter twingled each other , then you call as interpenetrating network .
Polymers can be classified according to the monomer compositions .
Homopolymer , if you have a monomer represented by and linked with each other , then we call as a homopolymer .
Homopolymer can have polymers made from two different monomers , say A and B as said in earlier classes , earlier class .
Example given is polystyrene and you know polymer made up of styrene and MMA .
Then , you can have copolymers .
Now , copolymers can be different molecular structures .
They can be present in the polymer chain randomly with no order , something like that where you do not have any order of placement between any orders of placement of the monomers .
They are present randomly .
They may call random copolymers .
If they are present alternatively , then we call alternating copolymer .
Now , if these two monomers are present like this where it is sort of combination of two small blocks of A and B , so it is like oligomer of A or polymer of A which is linked with oligomer or polymer of B .
This is example of block copolymer and there is another version of the block copolymers , where you might have a backbone of homopolymer and so on and from which you may be hanging chains of another block , then we call this as a graft copolymers .
You can extend this in 3 - D and have this as a brass polymer where you have a backbone , two dimension and these brasses are hanging from the base .
So , you can have brass polymers and so on .
We can classify polymers as a chain configuration .
For example , if I take a monomer like this , it can make polymers in two ways and so on , where if this is head and this is a tail , then polymer is formed by linking between head and tail and so on .
So , it is a head and tail .
Polymer or these polymers can be also imagined like this , where head and head is linked and a tail and tail will be linked to next monomers .
So , that is a head and head to head polymers .
Now , in practical sense , in most of the cases , you know exclusively almost every cases , when you synthesize a polymer , you get head or tail , head to tail polymers and you rarely get unless you make specific arrangement to make such a polymer , you don ’ t get head to head polymers .
You can have polymers as geometric isomers like in this case cis - iso , poly - iso from all the monomers are arranged in a polymer in a cis arrangement .
Now , you can have them in trans arrangement or a cis - trans arrangement as well .
So , that gives you geometric or cis - trans isomerism isomers .
You can have stereoisomers or which you call in polymer term , different tacticity .
If in this case , the centers or this have similar geometries , all these monomers are linked with same geometries are stereo stereochemistry , then we call this as isotactic .
If they have alternate stereochemistry next to next monomers or next to repeating units , then as call syndiotactic , and if the stereochemistry of the repeating units is randomly placed , there is no order and then , they are named as atactic .
So , if the repeating units have same stereochemistry , all the monomers , all the repeating units ’ chemistry called isotactic .
If they are alternate one after one , then if you call syndiotactic and if there is no order , it is placed random and then , we call as atactic .
Polymers can be classified as thermal behavior as well .
Now , you commonly think polymer you know where you can take polymer that make polymeric material and then , heat it .
On heating , it will become fluid and melt it and you give them a proper shape and cool them .
It will harden and occupy or get the shape you are looking for , a similar like a wax where you melt it and when it cools ; it takes up the shape of the container .
You place the wax and these are called thermoplastics .
Plastics is meaning formable .
So , it is polymeric materials which can be formed or can be transferred into different shapes by heating and subsequent cooling and this cycle can be done several times .
You can make a polymer of different shape and later on , if you melt it again by heating and again , you can reshape it , give it reshape , ok .
So , that is this .
These polymers are recyclable .
Another class is thermosets , where a polymer is made in C2 .
You start with small molecules monomers as a low viscous to liquid and then , put it in a container and then , cure it by heating or doing some chemical reaction by that doing this reaction are by heating .
It forms a cross linked network .
The terminologies I mentioned in last slide , last page where these polymer chains are networked .
They are cross linked and frozen .
So , once the polymer material has taken the shape of the container where we are doing the curing process , what happen is you cannot remelt it because they are cross linked .
The polymers cannot be moved around with each other .
So , they cannot be molten , you know melted by heating .
So , they are frozen .
They are like having infinite molecular weight cross linked polymer network .
Thermoplastics can be amorphous or semi - crystalline .
In case of amorphous polymers , where polymer chains , long polymer chains are placed randomly with no order and in case of crystalline polymers , you have the chains placed in like a crystal .
You know they are having a definite order .
We know the crystal ; the molecules are arranged in a definite order .
So , in a crystalline polymer , you have the polymer chains placed in definite order , but it is impossible or it is highly unlikely that you can make a perfectly crystalline 100 percent crystalline polymers because polymer chains are very large and they are flexible .
It is almost impossible to align all the chains one after to make a 100 percent or perfect crystalline polymers .
So , we are going to talk about crystalline polymers .
There is a mixture of a crystalline region and amorphous regions which do not have any order .
So , in more technical sense , it is called a semi - crystalline polymer .
Semi - crystalline polymer means a polymer having both crystalline regions and amorphous regions .
Amorphous polymers are mostly clear and crystalline because this domain , crystalline domains will scatter light .
They are depending upon the extent of crystalline and they can become translucent or opaque as well .
We will talk about this in little detail later .
We will talk about the polymer properties , thermosets which we talked about in the last page .
They can be glassy or elastomer .
As I said , they are cross linked network and if these chains between networks , they have flexibility which happens if the temperature at which they are is above their glass transition temperature .
I will talk about glass transition later in more detail but at present , just glass transition means temperature at which they becomes flexible , ok .
Now , if these chains are flexible in the temperature you are working , then they can be stretched and as soon as you remove the stress , they will come back to the original form .
So , it is like rubber .
So , you have a elastomer .
Now , if these chains are below the glass transient temperature , that means they do not have any flexibility in the temperature operation , then you cannot stretch the polymer because they do not have any flexibility in the thermal motion you talking about .
So , you cannot stress .
So , they are like glassy thermosets .
Polymer can be classified according to the applications .
They can be plastics , fiber or elastomer .
If they are defined more from a stress strain curve from the mechanical properties , if I plot strain versus stress or a polymer sample , then elastomers are like small strain , the small stress .
You can strain the polymer samples much more .
You know how the rubber works .
With small pull , they stretch out longer time .
So , this is like elastomer .
With a small stress , you can strain the sample much more fibers is the extreme case .
Other case , other side you take these fibers and strain it .
That means to stretch it little bit , you have to apply very high stress .
So , you have situation something like this .
So , to strain a fiber , you have to apply a very high stress .
For plastics are somehow in between this is fiber elastomers and this is plastic .
Now , after sometime , plastics yields i will talk about more about this term and it becomes easy to strain if you have this .
You know packaging films you have seen probably that when you stretch at the beginning , it takes a little difficult .
You have to give a lot of force , but once it starts stretching , that means the samples yielded .
Then , it becomes quite easy .
So , that is an example of plastic which gives away this type of stress strain curve .
We will talk about this more when we come back to the mechanical properties of the polymers .
Polymers , according to the applications , they can be named or classified as coating gels and additives and so on .
These are basically depending up on the applications where you are the polymers is find the application .
Based volume , performance and price polymers can be also categorized in two class , three classes .
Commodity polymers you know the polymers which you see in a real life in all the times , the bottles , buckets , shoes , clothes and all these things , they are having much volume used heavily and so , the prices are low and performance is also not so good compared to the others classes of polymers .
Other two is engineering polymers and high performance polymers and if the price in these three , the volume goes up like this .
More volume for commodity polymers , performance goes up in this direction .
The high performance polymers are having the highest performance and so does the price .
You know nothing comes cheap .
So , as you get more performance from a polymer , you have to pay for more .
So , prices also go up .
Now , I will come to the most important classification of polymers .
This is last and most important .
It is based on the polymerization mechanism and the reaction product .
Depending upon the reaction product , you can classify polymers as addition polymers or condensation polymers and depending upon mechanism of the polymerization , the process by which polymers are synthesized ; it can be classified as chain step polymers or chain - growth and step - growth polymers .
This term addition and condensation , this classification is originally proposed by Carothers in 1929 and as name suggests , the condensation polymers are synthesized by condensation reactions of the monomers , you know condensation in organic chemistry .
Condensation reaction means a reaction between two molecules and subsequent elimination of small molecules .
We are talking about making ester between acid and alcohol .
You make ester , a removal of a water molecule .
So , the condensation polymers are the polymers where you make or the polymers are synthesized by condensation reaction between the monomers .
I will give you a specific example .
For example , if I take , I will just give you a write a general way .
Now , so if I have plus these two reacts , n molecules of this and n combination of this , it will give you polyesters .
To give you more example , I take , I want to make polyamides .
So , I take this molecule and n molecules of this which gives .
See , in both the examples , in the last case when we made polyester or in this case we are making polyamides , we have this elimination of this small molecule in this case water .
Now , we can extend these examples .
Remember the last class we talked about synthesis of polycarbonate from phosgene and based , where the compound or the small molecules which eliminated what hcl .
So , all these are examples of condensation polymers , where the polymer is made from condensation reaction of the monomers .
Now , in this particular case , forming polyamides you can make this from diamine and diacids .
This can also be made from another variation of these monomers like diamines and diacyl chloride .
You can land up in same polymer along with different small molecules or it can be , these polyamides can be synthesized by self condensation amino acids which will make polypeptides .
So , same type of polymers .
In this case , polyamides can be synthesized by different set of monomers or self condensation of amino acids .
Now , what in addition ?
Polymers , they are defined as the polymers which are synthesized by addition reaction .
You know additional reaction means where monomers are just adding with each other and making polymers without elimination of small molecules .
Now , this nature polymers , say like cellulose , how do you define which class they belong ?
Whether this addition polymers or a condensation polymers because they are not synthesized in the lab , so we do not know the constituent from or the monomers from which are the type of reaction is condensation reaction on a addition reaction by which they are synthesized , but looking at the structure , what we can anticipate or we can imagine or we can hypothesize , monomers form which they have been synthesized , they can be synthesized in the lab or in other words , the polymers can be degraded to some other small monomers , monomeric molecules , hypothetical monomeric molecules from which this can be synthesized .
Now , I will give a proper structure , so that you get .
Now , this is cellulose .
Now , it can be degraded easily to this poly molecule which is nothing , but glucose .
So , though this is a natural polymer , but if we imagine monomers like this from which they are formed and in this case because you imagine or you hypothesized that these are formed to a condensation reaction , most of this natural polymers are classified as a condensation polymer .
Now , these two polymers condensation and addition polymers , they are often used synonymously with chain growth and step - growth polymers because most of the condensation polymers are synthesized by chain growth polymer mechanism , and addition polymers are made through a chain polymerization mechanism , but this is not always the case .
Students should not confuse , should not equate the terms with addition polymers with chain polymers or condensation polymers with step - polymers .
Now , next example of polyurethane .
Polyurethane can be synthesized from diol and di isocyanate .
Continue this here .
So , this is a polyurethane which is synthesized from diol and di isocyanate .
Now , what do you call this as addition polymer or a condensation polymer ?
According to a organic chemistry definition , this is addition reaction .
This is not a condensation reaction , but if you compare this polymer along with another condensation polymers , they have similar backbone structure , like if you compare with polycarbonate , this has this structure .
If you talk about polyester , we have this .
You talk about amide , you have this .
So , this structure , the functionality in the backbone , they are much more similar with your condensation polymers rather than the addition polymers .
Most addition polymer have a backbone of carbon , so according to the definition of addition polymers , it should be addition polymers and not the original definition of addition polymers .
It should be addition polymers , not a condensation polymers , but you can itself justify it being a condensation polymers , rather than a addition polymer .
So , the original definition of addition and condition polymers are modified and now , the condensation polymers are polymers where you have a functional group like this z , where z could be any of this .
It could be oxygen , ether , it could be ester , it could be amide or it would be any of these things , ok .
So , the original definition of addition and condensation polymers where addition was polymers which are made from addition reaction .
Condensation polymers were the polymers which were synthesized from the monomers by condensation reaction got modified and now , condensation reaction is where the polymer contain or a functional group at the backbone .
You can have a general representation of the backbone structure like this , where z represents any of the functional groups we talked about and any polymer which does not have this structure , we call them as addition reaction .
Now , that did not solve the entire problem .
If we give next example , then that will be clear .
We talked about very old phenol plus formaldehyde reaction .
This gives a polymer like this , ok .
Now , with the original definition of addition and condensation polymers , you will definitely classify as a condensation reaction because in this reaction , small molecules are coming out .
So , this polymer is formed by condensation reaction , but the definition we came up in the last few minutes back where condensation polymers at this represented by this anything else are called addition polymers .
We talked about the backbone of these polymers .
This is the back bone .
So , this is the backbone .
In this case , what do you see here ?
There is no functional group in the backbone .
These are all carbon .
So , according to the definition , just now it should be a addition polymer and not a condensation polymer , but you can clearly see that given a choice , you will probably classify this is more of a condensation polymer rather than addition polymers .
So , now the definition is the classification is done by summation with conditions .
For example , condensation polymers are polymers which fulfill any of this criteria .
One made for condensation reaction or it has functional group in the backbone or it can be degraded to hypothetical monomers from which they can be synthesized .
At least imagine that they are formed by condensation reaction or by elimination of some small molecules , and if any of the polymers does not fulfill any of these criteria , then we call them as addition polymers .
So , once again at present , you should classify condensation polymers .
If it fulfills any of the conditions , it is synthesized by condensation reaction or it has a function group in the backbone or you can imagine that it has been synthesized from monomers by elimination of small molecules , and if any of polymers which does not fulfill any of these criteria , we classify that as addition polymers .
Now , we will come to the mechanism of polymerization .
These two type of polymer , this classification chain growth and step - growth polymers , you take an example like I took in the class .
Styrene , you get polystyrene .
I can write a general structure like this .
CH Y CH 2 gives polymers .
Now , how do you think that these polymers are formed ?
In this case , these polymers cannot react with each other just by itself .
So , you need an initiator , whether the initiator is radical or cation or an anion , it has to initiate the chain .
So , if you react with say this is initiator , you get an active centre here and on which the second monomer gets added and you have this .
Don ’ t consider this dot .
So , how these polymers are getting formed ?
Either the active centre on which next monomer is getting added and third monomer will be added in there .
So , you have this type of polymers are getting formed in a chain reaction .
Now , in a normal case , in general case , the formation of this active species , they are much lower compared to this step which basically is the propagation step of the polymers by which the chain is formed which means as soon this active species initiates , this is formed , it initiates and the chain formation is completed .
I will come to more detail how this gets terminated and all these things , but for time being , we should understand that as soon as this in more often as soon as this active centre is generated , it reacts initiate the chain and the chain is formed .
So , the more and more active centers , more and more initiator gets generated in a system , more and more chain form , so if I plot conversation , say percentage conversation means the fraction of monomers is reacted or this appeared from the reaction medium with the molecular weight or the size of the chain or a size .
What do we expect with time conversion is , also you can write time , you know with more time .
Let us talk about conversion now .
So , at the beginning when this initiator is formed , in most cases they said that it immediately start the activation and initiation and then , complete the chain .
So , you have large molecule at the beginning itself .
You have a large molecular weight .
The more and more this initiator generates in the system , active species more and more chain gets .
So , at very beginning itself , you get a high polymer , very high molecular weight polymer in the system and more and more active species get generated , more and more monomers reacts .
So , more and more polymer chains are formed .
So , what is happening here ?
At the very beginning itself , the polymers , large polymer chains are forming and as time goes , the conversion happens .
More and more reactor you get such the number of such polymer chains increases with conversion .
The more conversation means more number of chains .
Polymer chains are getting formed ; it is not the molecular weight increases .
So , with conversion , more and more polymers chains are getting formed .
So , if I stop , say the reactions somewhere here after 10 percent conversion or 5 percent conversion , what do you see ?
What do we expect in the system mixture ?
5 percent conversion , that means 90 monomers are left in the system .
So , you get plenty of monomers , 95 percent monomers .
What about the fate of that 5 percent monomers which got converted , no which got reacted ?
This is all most all of them as formed belong chain polymers .
So , along with that 95 of monomer present in the system , we get the other part as a long chain polymer molecules .
So , even if you stopped at the very beginning with a very low conversation at say 5 percent , you see high molecular weight , polymers , monomers and the initiator in the medium .
If you stop here as a 95 percent level , then you see lot of polymer , large chain polymers and the small amount of monomers and the left over initiators , ok .
Now , I go to the step growth polymers , and then come back later to compare between these two .
Now , say I take a monomer NH2 , say RNAH2 R dash COH CO OH forming polyamides .
I write this as AA and this as BB .
This is diamines and this is diacids .
These two monomers can react by itself .
It does not need any external initiator like chain polymers .
As a matter of fact that you need catalyst to accelerate the reaction , but you do not need in true sense , you do not need an external initiator like in the case of chain polymers .
Now , how this will react ?
How do you form polymers ?
First , this will react .
Two monomers will react and form like this , species like this .
So , this is dimer .
Now , this dimer , the choice of reacting with itself or has a choice of reacting with any of the two monomers , if it reacted with this , so you get a BB , again AA .
If it reacts with this , if it reacts with this , then you get BB AA and BB , ok .
Now , if it reacts with itself , then you get BB AA BB .
So , you form these trimers .
This is a trimer consists of monomer molecules and this is tetramer consists of four monomer units or structural units .
Now , once you form the trimer , the options increases .
It can react with monomer .
It can react with any of the dimmers or it can react with the trimer itself making the possibilities more and more .
If it reacts with monomer , it will form tetramer .
If reacts with dimer , it will form pentamer .
If it reacts with itself , it will form hexamer .
Imagine , once you form the tetramer , what will happen ?
It reacts with monomer , dimer , trimer and itself forming dimer , forming pentamer , hexamer , heptamer and so on .
So , in the chain reaction , you have the long polymer chain at the beginning itself .
In this case , you are not getting long polymer chain at the beginning .
What you are getting is the polymer chains are forming in steps , dimer , trimer and tetramer and because these monomers can react this function group , so they will react immediately .
So , the conversion of polymer , conversion of monomers will be very high , even at the beginning forming dimer , tetramer or these small oligomers .
So , what happen is only at the last , at the end of the polymerization , you will see a long polymer chain are forming , unlike the chain polymers where you have even a small conversion , you get a larger polymer .
So , if you stop the reaction in the beginning , you will see a lot of these high conformation conversion , but a lot of these small oligomers .
So , in the next class , I will continue with this condensation polymers , and talk about the , compare between or the difference between chain polymers and chain growth polymers and step growth polymers .
Then , it will become more clear the difference in the mechanism of these polymers to polymerization medium .
In next class , also I will talk about , continue with the introduction , more talk about the , we will talk about the nomenclature .
How polymers are you know named and also I will talk about give you a prospective of the molecular weight of polymers .
You have learned that the polymers have larger molecular weight and invariably , either of these synthetic processes you land up in distribution of molecular .
Not all the polymer chains are of same size or same molecular weight .
They will be of different molecular size and I will talk about the molecular weight ; why you need more definition of molecular weight and so on .
So , we will come back to the next class with this .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
We will continue our discussion on step - growth polymerization which we were having in last lecture .
Now , let us look at what we have learnt so far in terms of step - growth polymerization .
We have learnt the mechanism of step - growth polymerization and its comparison over chain polymers , and we also learnt how and what is the effect of equal reactivity of functional group , and we also understood the justification of why the functional group of reacting molecules including the intermediate species should have same reactivity irrespective of their size and irrespective of whether the functional group present in the other direction is already reacted or not .
Also , we have seen that this is experimentally proven that once the length of the chain goes beyond 3 , then the reactivity actually becomes independent of the chain length of the oligomeric species .
We also learnt the Carothers equation relating to the average degrees of polymers , polymerization and the conversion p , and we also same time learnt how to get the number of average molecular weight from the degree , average degrees of polymerization and I give more time in this because as I said that sometimes , there are confusion among students how to get m n from x n .
It is actually m n is x n multiplied by the average molecular weight of the structural unit , not the repeat unit and we also discussed the kinetics of step polymerization .
In this class , in this lecture , what we will do is we will continue the discussion on kinetics of step polymerization and then , go for predicting the number average degrees of polymerization for a step - polymerization which is happening in a close system , and that will give us the importance of equilibrium constant of a step polymerization reaction .
We then move to a step polymerization in a open and driven system , where it is not possible to completely remove the condensate out of the system .
That means there will be some condensate remaining in the system , polymerization system .
In that case , what is the consequence of that presence of the condensate on the molecular weight of the polymer and then , we will move to the different strategies of how to control the molecular weight in the polymerization .
Now , let us go back and see what we have learnt in the last class in terms of kinetics of poly step polymerization .
Now , this is the reaction .
We took as our model the polyesterification reaction and this is the reaction we followed and finally , what we arrived at is as follows .
That for self catalyzed reaction x n bar is 1 plus 2 n square k t , where n 0 is the concentration of the monomeric species at beginning , whereas for external catalyzed reaction , we got x n is 1 plus n 0 k dash t .
Now , from these two equations , we have seen in the last class itself that and it is very difficult to build a high molecular weight , high value of x n bar for a self catalyzed reaction and that is the reason in most cases , in a most industrial polymerization has taken place in presence of a catalyst which is added from outside the system .
So , most of the reactions in industrial setup are carried out in external catalyzed reaction .
So , our discussion in our discussion , we will be mainly focusing on this external catalyzed reaction and we will not discuss too much about the self catalyzed reaction .
Now , let us take an experimental observation of an external catalyzed system .
One , experimental observation .
Let us consider reaction adipic acid plus diethylene glycol at 190 degree centigrade in presence of 0.4 mol percent of para toluene sulphonic acid as a catalyst and the product is polyester plus h 2 o .
So , this is what is observed experimentally in this axis .
We have time , say it minutes , 200,400 , 600 , 800 and so on and this axis , we have percentage conversion .
This is 99 , this is somewhere 98 and in this side , we have x n bar which is equals to 1 by 1 by p and experimental , it has been found to the following something like this .
Now , what do we see here in this experimental observation ?
We see that except this initial part , the entire region for the entire conversional region , you have a linear relationship of degrees , average degrees of polymerization with time which is predicted by your reaction mechanism .
Now , what does it mean ?
Now , remember the reaction .
How do the go about the reaction ?
Now , in during that deduction of that kinetic equation expression , we have used functional group like this which means we have considered the reactivity of functional group independent of the size of the molecules and here , it found to be that expression is valid for almost entire range of conversion region , which means that this assumption what we have considered here , that equal reactivity of the functional group is valid even experimentally .
So , even if at high conversion , the length of the polymer chain or the oligomer chains are quite high .
The reactivity of the concern group at the end of that residing , at the end of the chain are same as when the conversion was smaller .
That means the sizes of the polymer chains are smaller .
Now , remember what are the other conditions we have assumed or imposed during the derivation of this expression was that there is one is to one stoichiometric composition of two monomers or two functional groups .
In this case , carboxylic acid and OH and also , we were taking out this condensate , this small molecule , so that practically the reaction is irreversible .
We are taking out the condensate small molecules h 2 o in this case to make sure that the reaction happened .
This equilibrium reaction actually happens almost irreversibly .
So , what are the other observation we can make here , say at for a conversion of p ?
For p is 0.98 or 98 percent which correspondence to x n bar of 50 t is say , around 450 minutes .
Now , for p , 0.99 or 99 percent x n corresponding to 100 and t is almost 85 .
So , we see here that from reaching up to 98 percent conversion , it takes about 450 minutes and build a average degree of polymerization of 50 .
If the average molecular of the structural units is 200 , then the molecular weight will be above 10,000 .
Now , that may not be sufficient for our purpose .
We are looking for building high molecular weight for all practical purpose .
We need high molecular weight , so this 98 percent conversion may not be sufficient for our , it will not serve our purpose .
So , we must push the conversion higher , so that the molecular weight we get is high enough for which will serve our purpose .
So , from 98 , conversion going to 99 percent conversion , we have to almost double the reaction type , some 450 to 850 .
So , for a organic chemist which is doing a stratification reaction for small molecules , a 98 percent conversion may be quite satisfactory which means that at 450 minutes time , he can stop the reaction and take the product which is 98 percent conversion which is quite sufficient and quite satisfactory , but for a polymer chemist , that 90 percent conversion is not sufficient .
You know there is no choice for a polymer chemist other than continues the reaction for almost similar time to get a high enough molecular weight .
In this case , x n bar degrees of polymerization of 100 and if this molecular is not sufficient enough , then you have to keep the reaction even longer to high the conversion and hence , higher the molecular weight of the polymers .
Now , because you have to keep this reaction for longer time , sometimes that actually posses some difficulties in terms or stability of the ingredients , the chemical species which is present and as you have seen that this is typically done at higher temperature , which means that if you keep this for a longer time , there is the possibility of the polymer x species might degrade and form colour species which is not desired .
What we also have seen this from this equation that the x n bar is linearly dependent on the initial monomer concentration as well , which means that to increase for a given rate constant , it is always referred to use a high concentration of monomer and that is why , typically this reaction are done at very high concentration in solution or in some cases , they are done in a bulk .
That means you take the monomers as such which ensures the maximum possible concentration of the monomeric unit .
So , we now move to that .
This again , this was deduced for such a way that we are taking out the condensate , in this case H 2 molecules , so that reaction was almost irreversible reaction .
Now , let us consider a close system and take that we will write this reaction and reaction is constant .
So , equilibrium constant can be written as now , if the conversion is P , if the conversion at equilibrium is say P e in this case and m 0 is the monomer concentration at the beginning at t is equal to 0 , then at the equilibrium what is the concentration of COH is P m 0 .
Initially , it was n 0 .
Now , P e m 0 has reacted .
So , at equilibrium , the concentration of COH group is given by 1 minus P e and because we are talking about one is to one stoichiometric ratio here as well , this is same as the concentration of OH at equilibrium .
What is the concentration of CO group and H 2 O at equilibrium ?
That is P e m 0 .
So , P e m 0 , so in case of that rearranging , we get P e as root k 1 plus root k or x n bar is 1 by 1 over P e .
It gives you 1 plus root k .
Now , remember the difference between the earlier case and this case .
In this case , we are doing or we are carrying out the reaction in a close system which means none of the reactants or the products are taken out from the system , and reaction is allowed to reach a equilibrium and from this reaction , we now can say that this is the formula which relates an average degree of polymerization with the equilibrium constant .
So , how this translates to the real number , let us look at this following data .
These are all calculated data from this expression .
I will try to explain what it means in a minute .
Now , if we carry out this reaction in a close system , if the equilibrium constant k you say 1 , then the equilibrium conversion would be 0.5 and which will lead to degrees of polymerization , average degrees of polymer of 2 .
That means , if our reaction is such a way that your equilibrium constant is the value of equilibrium constant is 1 , then at the end of the reaction that mean at the equilibrium , you are only going to get dimers .
If you want to build a molecular weight that means , if you want to build say a degree of polymerization of 100 in a close system , then your equilibrium conversion has to be 0.9 which means your key has to be almost in the order of 10 to the power of 4 .
That means by itself your reaction has to be very highly reactive , so that by itself without removing the byproduct , you can get the product .
If you talk about a degree of polymerization 200 , say this is probably the number we look for .
When you make a high molecular weight polymer , then your equilibrium conversion has to be 0.995 which means you have to look at the number of k , value of k which is at the order of 10 to 5 .
That means your reaction has to be very much towards the product side , reactivity has to be very high , which is seldom the case , which is not the common case normally .
Typically , polyesterification , they have the order of a 0.1 to 10 poly aberration of the order of which probably is the highest among the known reacts .
Typical , common reaction is about the 10 to the power of 2 transesterification reaction of the order of 1 to 10 .
That means , typically these hang around between this and if you do not remove your condensate or the polymer , if you wish , then your reaction will end up at oligomer stage , may be dimer , trimer or tetramer .
It will be mixture of that , but average will be say , a dimer for an equilibrium constant of 1 and for an equilibrium constant of 10 to the power 2 order .
It will be at the stage of x n above 10 .
So , that gives the importance of the equilibrium constant in a reaction in a step polymerization reaction that you always prefer .
You always have a better reaction on your hand which is having a high equilibrium constant .
So , this convinces that we have to , there is no other way .
We have to do a reaction where we always continuously take out the condensate from the system .
Now , what happened if we take out the products is it will be moved towards right hand side .
So , polymer will build , but it is not always possible or it is almost impossible for engineering design to take out every possible condensate , you know all the 100 percent with condensate .
In this case , H 2 O for a polyesterification reaction , it is not possible to take out all the 100 percent H 2 O which is evolved .
See because of so many reasons .
Because of the high of in the molecular when it build up , there are high molecular weight .
Then , the viscosity of the medium goes , you know increases quite a lot and when the viscosity goes up , this small molecular condensate diffusion of the condensate becomes very slow .
Now , to take out that H 2 molecule or any other condensate from the reaction , it has to first come to the surface .
Then only , they can suck out that molecule from the system , but if it is forming inside the reaction in first , it has to defuse out to the surface of your reaction medium and then only , it will go up of the system .
So , it becomes you know lot of cases .
If the molecular weight is quite high and viscosity is very high which is you know more often the case .
In case of bulk polymerization that melts when you are talking about no solvent , only the monomer molecules , it becomes very difficult .
That means reaction almost becomes diffusion control .
So , what we now know that it is almost difficult to take out entirely the small condensate .
So , we should consider a open and driven system where there is a incomplete removal of our condensate material .
So , we will consider the same reaction here in this reaction and in this case , which will come the H 2 .
We will take out .
It is taken out , but not all of them have been taken out of system .
It will be part of it or trace of which will be remaining .
So , how we write the equilibrium constant in that case ?
So , for a open driven system with incomplete removal of the condensate k , again CO concentration H 2 O COH .
So , same thing P e m 0 .
Now , in this case , we do not know what is the concentration of H 0 H2O .
So , we are writing like this and again , m 0 1 minus P m 0 1 minus p which makes this .
Now , we know x n is 1 by 1 minus P .
So , this can be written as let me write once again .
So , what is finally , k comes p .
Here , we are choosing to write P instead of P equilibrium because the two equilibriums have not been reached because we are taking out the system .
So , instead of P equilibrium , in last case we are writing P as the conversion .
So , let us continue with the next page which means x n .
Now , most cases as we learned by now that for a high molecular weight polymer , P is close to 1 .
So , we can ignore this for time being for if the molecular weight is high enough , so we can write .
So , what does it mean ?
This means that the x n , the number wise molecular weight is inversely proportional to the square root of the amount of condensate present .
If I make a table with the corresponding numbers , how does it look ?
Now , to get it , we are trying to get x n bar of 100 .
How this k and H2 is related ?
What does this table means ?
The table means that if you have a reaction with high k to build same molecular weight , in this case average degrees of polymerization of 100 we are considering average degrees of polymers as 100 to reach that level , to reach that molecular weight .
If your k is higher , then you can afford to keep some of the water molecules in the system .
If your k is low , then you have to make sure that you takeout the water molecules as much as possible .
So , to reach at level of 100 degrees of polymers , you have to reach a concentration level of water molecules as low as these , 10 to the minus 4 order whereas , if you have 10 to the 2 order of k , you can leave with 10 to the power of minus 2 level of H 2 in the system .
So , again this is meaning , this means that if you want to build a high molecular weight , always better to take out the condensate out from the system .
Now , as I said that it is not possible always to take out the entire amount of condensate through the system .
So , in that case , what happened is the next alternate way .
You can build high molecular weight .
The alternative way is to design reactions , where k will be high because if k is high , then you can afford to keep some of the condensate molecule in the system and still build a high enough molecular weight .
Now , as I said before that for engineer , it is not always very easy to build a reactor where you know you can take out the condensate molecules to the level , where you want for the building of molecular weight .
So , in that case , there is a limitation , there is a limit at which you can take out the condensate from a system .
So , what happened if there is a limit up to which you can go down in H2O level ?
You have to increase .
The chemist would have to design a reaction which will be inherently having high equilibrium constant .
Let us take an example .
It will clarify more .
In one of the last lectures or previous lectures , so in the synthesis of polycarbonate form , this phenol , a using phosgene .
Now , there is another way of synthesizing polycarbonate is by transesterification of this phenol with a diphenol carbonate in presence of base catalyst , base as a catalyst that gives us phenol as by product .
Now , in this reaction , the phenol boiling point is 180 degrees centigrade , bp of phenol is 180 degree centigrade .
So , you can imagine that you have to at least have a reaction temperature of 180 , so that you can take out the phenol vapor from the system .
Now , the key of this reaction , equilibrium reaction if you are around close to one which means that if you do this reaction in a close system without taking out phenol from the system , you land up in an average degrees of polymer of two .
It will land up in a , demerit will land up in a diametric state .
So , naturally its reaction is done such a way that phenol is taking out from the system and reaction is done at very high temperature .
So , the viscosity is lower and lower , so that you can take out the phenol molecule .
Now , you have to increase the temperature slowly because as you build up the molecular weight as the reaction goes , the viscosity of the medium builds .
So , to take out the mineral molecule , you have to make the viscosity lower .
So , you increase the temperature again and when you increase the temperature , again the time goes up ; again the molecular weight builds up .
So , it is a serial process .
It is a consequence of a process .
So , here to build a molecular weight , if I consider this same as H 2 O , case in last line in the last page , this k is 1 .
So , to build a x n of 100 , the phenol concentration should be of 5.05 into 10 to the power minus 4 mol per liter to understand because the equilibrium consent of this reaction is roughly one to build a molecular having a degrees of polymers of 100 .
You have to bring down the phenol level in the system to such a low level , but as I said that sometimes , it is limited by the design of the reactor , it is not possible .
So , the chemical engineer will come to a chemist that you design a reaction by which you can increase the key .
Now , how can you do that ?
What is the mechanism of the reaction ?
Mechanism of the reaction is that you have a base catalyst reaction , so you have this molecule addicting to this carbonate group nucleophilic attack and the reaction starts from there .
So , how do you increase the reactivity of this reaction ?
Let us see one of the strategies in the next page .
Now , if this is the lipophilic center , if we increase the electrophilicity of this carbon , then the attack of that phenolate coming from this phenolate group will be more feasible .
So , equilibrium constant how it is achieved ?
If you increase photo electron withdrawing group , then the attack of this , the nucleophilic attack of this phenolate ion becomes much more feasible which will increase the k much higher compared to a di phenol carbonate , where there was no electron withdrawing group .
So , in this case , you can afford to keep this condensate at a much higher level compared to just phenol which we shown that that reaction equilibrium constant was 1 .
So , this one example where chemical engineers is restricted by the limitation of the reactor design , where the condensate can be taken out to a limited level , but still that will be not be sufficient to build up the molecular weight , enough molecular weight .
So , in that case , chemist has to design the monomers such a way that the reaction , equilibrium reaction or equilibrium constant is higher .
I just showed one example in this page .
Now , one thing you have to also remember is to build high molecular weight .
You have to make sure of some other conditions .
For example , you have to make sure that the functional groups are available during the entire reaction , so that some cases what happen you know these are exceptional case , where when you build a molecular weight after some size , it might feasibly turn the solution or from the melt of the reaction .
So , you have to make sure that all the functional groups that mean all the monomeric species are the oligomeric species .
They stay in the solution or in the reaction medium all the time during the reaction and here also , there are some exceptional cases that this equal reactivity or the functional group does not apply , but we are not talking about those cases in this course because they are exceptional cases and most of you know all those common reactions and the reactions we come across always follow this rule of a equal reactivity of the functional group .
So , we move to the next topic .
How do you control the molecular weight ?
So , strategy is for controlling in a step polymerization .
Now , why do we need to control a molecular weight of a step polymer ?
Now , if you see I am targeting a molecular weight of something which correspondence to an average degrees of polymerization of 100 .
Now , if we land up at the end of the reactions something higher than 100 , then also problem .
If we land up a number which is lower than 100 , then also a problem .
If it is lower than the polymer , it will not be serving our purpose and if it is higher , then it will pose a lot of other problems like taking the polymer and processing for the application will be difficult because the main viscosity of this polymer is higher .
So , handling will be difficult .
This is one example of the difficulties if you have higher molecular weight than the targeted one .
So , it is always desirable to have your reaction stopped or at the end of the reaction , you get whatever you target it for .
So , you target for 100 is always desirable that at the end of the reaction , you should get an average degrees of polymerization of 100 .
Now , how do you do that ?
Now , we have seen that x n of 100 corresponds to a p of 0.99 in one is to one case , one is to isometric ratio of the functional group .
So , you can say that if I stop the reaction and we have this reaction kinetics , how the p varies with time .
We also know how p is related to time .
We have seen in the previous pages .
So , you can always say that if we stop the reaction , such a time which correspondence to a p of 0.99 , then you will get a molecular weight corresponding to degrees of polymerization of 100 .
So , as simple as that .
Now , what is the problem in that if you stop reaction as a level of say , 0.99 or 90 percent conversion ?
What do we get in hand ?
So , if you are talking about a polyesterification reaction , what do you get at 99 percent conversion level ?
You get an average of 100 and what you have both the sides and you also may have some monomer present .
So , at the level of 100 degrees of polymer , what do you have in this reaction medium ?
You have the hydroxyl acids which correspond to some size and you may also have , we will also have some unreacted monomers as well .
So , you stop the reaction in this level .
What you have ?
You have till the possibility of these molecules participating in the further reaction .
So , when you take this polymer at this stage and mix with the other additives and fillers and do a compounding which is a further process which you do in a melt state , as I said in the first lecture , then these functional groups are free to react at there .
So , they might do react and build molecular weight or they might bide in between and degrade the molecular weight .
So , if you stop your reaction to build a molecular weight or target a molecular rate of 100 degrees of polymers correspond to 100 , if you stop the reaction at 99 percent conversion level starting from one is to one , so isometric ratio you get this , but this will pose lot of difficulties in the next step when you do processing steps like compounding or molding because this has presence of active functional group .
So , this can react with each other or a polymer backbone and degrade the polymer or build the molecular .
So , you know at the end of your molding step , the molecular weight might be different than what you target it for .
So , your properties what you targeted will be different .
So , it is not advisable that you do a reaction and stop in between at the level what you target it for .
So , how can we achieve that ?
What are the strategies we can achieve what we targeted one is to one of the monomers in excess ?
For example , say you have a monomer AA and BB .
Now , take a concrete example of a polyamide formation .
If I take this as excess , now this will react with this acid functionality as along they are present because they are present in a smaller amount .
At the end , all these carbolic liquid will be consumed and you will land up a polymer or oligomer chain with both sides amine groups .
So , you will land up something like this .
So , in this case , both sides are amine group .
Now , this cannot react by themselves .
So , if you stop the reaction in that level , you are ensuring that there is no left over swage group , carboxylic group in the medium , so that they cannot take the amines by itself , cannot take part in the reaction themselves .
If I take the axis , the carboxylic group , what will land up in ?
You land up in something where both side are COH group , right ?
If you have excess , this diamine has an excess quantity , then we will land up in a polymeric or oligomeric chain , where both sides are capped with amine group .
If you have excess di carboxylic acids , then you will land up in the polymeric or oligomeric chain have in di carboxylic acids .
Carboxylic acids have both the ends which will ensure that this cannot react by themselves , so that your polymers are virtually dead .
Now , unless you have something in the reaction medium , further when you take these polymers out and do the compounding and molding step , unless you have something in your adding from outside which will be able to react with either of this left over functional group .
Then , it will stay as it is .
It will not react with the functional group present in the polymers formed itself .
So , that is one of the strategies of making or controlling the polymer .
As we will see what is the quantification or how much excess we have to take to target a sudden molecular weight .
We will come to that quantification level .
In next page , another strategy is to take chains topper .
Chains topper molecules are molecules having mono functional group .
So , instead of taking AA plus BB , you take just B in excess .
Then , the chain in which the ends are capped with B , the other ends are dead .
This is dead end .
So , if you have some chain like this B with dead end here and again B with dead end here , then you are forming a chain which does not have a reactive group or either of the sides .
That means this reaction this monomer cannot or this chain cannot take further reactions which will allow you to control the molecular rate .
Let us take example .
If I take again go back to same polyamide formation .
If I add a benzoic acid , you are going to get a molecule something like .
So , this end does not have any reactive functional group .
So , by this way , if you have all the chains are capped with a long functional entity , not reactive group , then will these molecules will not take part in further reactions .
So , if you take this out , this polymer out and do further in a molding and compounding , go to the compounding step , then because these chains are capped with a known reactive group , they will not take part in further reaction which means the polymers are practically dead polymers .
So , your molecular weight has no change .
So , whatever at the end of your processing steps , you will get the same polymer in the property which was related to the molecular weight , of your target molecular weight .
So , you will get that same property , but in the first case , if you stop the reaction in between at some conversional level , then what happened in after step you go through the compounding and processing step .
In the final article , final application , the molecular rate will vary from your target molecular rate .
That means the properties also will vary .
So , it is advisable is always done in industrially .
Also , it is done by either by taking one of the bi functional or poly functional monomers in excess or mono functional monomer which is termed as chains topper added externally , so that we can control the chain length you know target .
Now , what is the , how we can relate to the amount of excess or amount of this mono functional chains topper ?
How does it is related with the target degrees of polymerization .
We will come to the next class , next lecture , but in detail , but just before we go to that quantification , what was , how did we get the x n bar or any polymer mixture .
Remember , it is the number of molecules at the beginning , and number of molecules at the end , which will give you the average degrees of polymerization .
So , what will we do ?
We will take from this , from this and continue in the next lecture , the quantification .
That means , we know that there are two strategies , we can follow taking one of the bi functional monomer in excess or we can add some amount of chains topper which are nothing but mono functional groups .
How much excess will I take ?
What is the relation between conversion and excess in the molecular weight ?
How much should I take , because if we take too much excess , then ultimately you will not land up in the target molecular weight , you know the molecular weights will be very , could be very low .
So , you should know a priori what is the relation between a molecular weight and the ratio between the monomers by a function or if we add , what is the effect of molecular weight if we add some mono functional group from outside .
We will come back in the next lecture with that .
Welcome back , now in this lecture we are going to continue our discussion , we are having in last lecture on Chain Dimensions .
And then we would move to a new topic on Frictional Properties of Polymer Molecules in dilute solution , which basically talks about mainly the viscosity of polymer solution .
Now , in the topics we have completed our discussion shape and size of polymer chains , and then you also completed deducing an expression for understanding expression for freely rotating chain .
Now , what we are going to discuss is how the chain dimension , the chain size namely the RMS end - to - end distance ; and radius of gyration varies when we introduce the restriction on bond rotation .
And then we also , we will understand how the long range steric interactions effect the polymer chain dimension ; and then the end we will start the discussion on frictional properties of polymer molecules in dilute solution .
Now just recap , we had whatever discussion we had in last lecture , about the chain dimension , polymer chain dimension for a linear polymer chain we discussed that most of the polymer chains are flexible in nature ; and they form random coil structure , either in solution or in merit .
And we used Gaussian distribution function to get or understand the end - to - end , RMS end - to - end distance for that , then if the chain or the backbone , polymer backbone become stiff , then polymer the coil , the random coil becomes more elongated , and it is become worm like ; and if it is if the backbone becomes more stiff , then ultimately the chain become like a rod , so these are the possible shapes a polymer chain can take .
In terms of size , we discussed a contour length , which is basically n multiplied by n is the number of bonds , and l is the length of each bonds .
And then we introduced , we said that because the random coil is always fluctuating in because we have several conformation , numerous conformation the coil shape is always changing .
So , actually you have the end - to - end distance between in a polymer coil is always changing , so you have to get a time average end - to - end distance , we introduced the term root mean square end - to - end distance , which is given by this .
And then you also discuss radius of gyration again time average quantity , which is the root mean square distance of the , elements of the difference parts of the polymer chain from the center of gravity of the coil .
And you also found that there is a relation between the radius of gyration , and root mean square end - to - end distance , so if you find if you find one , the other one you can get it from this expression .
We discussed first the freely rotating chain , how the size the end - to - end distance , RMS end - to - end distance comes about , we found that that is n to the power half multiplied by l .
And then we also discussed the effect of RMS end - to - end distance , the effect of bond angles restriction on the RMS end - to - end distance , and then today we will start discussing on these two topic or in these two restrictions .
So , this is what you found , freely rotated , freely jointed chain there is no restriction we got RMS end - to - end distance for free chain , if as a subscript it is meaning is that it is a free rotating chain , it is given by this expression and when you have bond angle restriction , we get this expression .
Now , most cases usually polymer and carbon backbone , so it has a theta between 90 to 180 which means cos theta is negative ; so as expected this will be more than the end - to - end distance , RMS end - to - end distance restriction from bond angle will be higher than the end - to - end distance for freely rotating chain .
And same as the radius of gyration , most cases we have now tetrahedral bond angle is 109.5 degree in that case , this factor comes out 1.4 times .
So , basically the root mean square end - to - end distance for bond angle restricted chain would be nearly about 1 4th times , 1.4 times of the freely rotating chains RMS end - to - end distance .
Now , let us talk about the restriction on bond angle bond rotation , rotation about the single bond , and which we are talking about because this is this restriction comes out because of near nearby groups .
So , this is this is short range steric restriction , now we start our discussion with a simple molecule of n butane , and we found out how the conformation , what are the confirmations this normal butane can take , and how the potential energy changes with different conformations .
So , what which is we know that , the word the potential energy , the chances of that being stable is higher ; so this is 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , these are four carbon atom in a butane , we are not writing the hydrogen groups here .
Now , this configuration , we can put in two types configuration sawhorse projection , and Newman projection , and then in this case , this 1 methyl group and 4 methyl group is trans to each other .
So , we are telling this conformation as planar trans , and we can show this conformation in Newman projection like this , this dots are CH 3 when this CH 3 groups are same side in the same plane , there are seems to each other , then we have a planar cis conformation , and this is shown by Newman projection in this .
Obviously this here , because of short range steric interaction is lower , this will be much stable , much more stable than this is conformation where the short range steric interactions are higher between the two methyl group .
Now , in this case , we are defining the dihedral angle is 0 , dihedral angel is the angle between two planes , one plane is going through c 1 , c 2 , and c 3 ; so this plane 1 , 2 , 3 , the plane going through this three carbon 1 , 2 , 3 that is one plane , and second plane is between 2 , 3 , and 4 .
Now , in this case they basically above this line , and other one lies below this line , so we are telling this is a dihedron angle of 0 degree , and in this case obviously , dihedron angle of 180 degree .
Now , some books , some texts follow that this is 0 degree , so do not confuse , in this course telling this is 180 degree , and this is 0 degree because we will use this phi in the expression of RMS end - to - end distance as well , so this phi is equal to 0 , and this is phi is equal to 180 degree .
So , the end - to - end distance in this case , distance between two ends , two carbon atoms present in the ends at 3.9 ampere , and in this case 2.9 ampere and as you have , you can understand and this is more stable conformation than this .
So , obviously the end - to - end distance would be more closer to this , compared to this ; and if there was no restriction , for a free rotation it would have been somewhere in the middle .
If there are no restriction on one rotation obviously , it would have been somewhere in between in middle , exactly in middle , but because this gives when you go from middle towards the planar trans conformation , you get lower energy , lower potential energy whereas , you can go towards cis conformation you get higher energy .
So , it is always likelihood that pure end - to - end distance will be higher , compared to when there was no restriction of potential .
You can show schematically , how this potential energy varies with different conformation , which is obtained by changing the dihedron angle , this one is the planar trans conformation which as I showed , because these two methyl groups are extremely apart , they have the least potential energy .
And you can rotate the , you are looking from front side , so this is 1 , this is 2 , this circle is 3 , and this is 4 these are the four carbon atoms , so you are looking from front side if you rotate the c 2 , c 3 single bond then you will get all this from other conformation .
If you if you rotate the c 2 , c 3 on clockwise direction , you will get this conformation , if you put in anticlockwise direction , you will get this other conformation .
For example , if you rotate this , you take this corner and rotate 60 degree , then this methyl will come here , this methyl will come here , and this bond will come here , and this bond will go there .
Now , these are this conformations are eclipse conformations , and these three are conformations , and most specifically this is trans conformation , and these are gauss conformations .
So , obviously , the polymer chain or in butane will have in this case n - butane will more likely to be somewhere here , which will have higher distance between c 1 , and c 4 ends .
Now , you can imagine , now if you now go from n butane , to n pentane and then slowly increase the number of carbon atoms to make a polymer , to how how this potential energy will look like .
If you imagine that , it will be more more towards this region , the minima will be or the least energy would be , for larger polymer molecule , they will be more such conformations ; and the lowest energy conformations will be around here , will be around say 0 degree to 90 degree range , so you can imagine that , there is numerous possible conformations for a linear polymer .
Now , that is very difficult to you know get the end - to - end distance , due to that rotational restrictions , short range rotational restriction , it is difficult to get theoretically , it is possible for simplest molecule which is like a polyethylene , which keeps this term .
So , this is additional term appearing , and this o is for the subscript for end - to - end distance , for a chain RMS end - to - end distance for a polymer chain which has both one angle rotation , and also short range steric , rotational restriction due to short range steric interactions .
Now , as we said the least energy would preferred around dihedron angle 0 and or both the sides , so in that case you can , this term would be more than one , so this term due to bond rotational restriction will be higher than the term , which was for the other end - to - end distance , where it has only bond angle restrictions .
So , the molecules , now we just talked about this theoretical number or this expression for this simple polyethylene molecule ; now if you have side groups obviously , this rotational restriction will be higher , because the polymer will be much more stiffer than polyethylene molecules , so rotational restriction will be higher .
And those situations become much more complicated , and those are basically very difficult to get impossible to get theoretically , so what is done instead of getting expression for the contribution due to the rotational restriction , for short range steric interaction , we have introduced a new term which is called steric parameter , which take care of the , who takes care of the rotational restriction term .
So , this was equivalent to this term for simple polyethylene molecule , for a much stiffer molecules like polystyrene , we cannot get such expression what we are introducing instead of this term , we are steric parameter .
So , you can guess obviously , you can expect that this term would be higher than this term , because this was for polyethylene molecule , and this is for more stiffer chains , so this term would be higher than this expression , and this term is usually comes around 1.5 to 3.5 .
So , if you compare this dimension , which is basically we are calling this 0 , this whole meaning that the RMS end - to - end distance for polymer chains which is both bond angle restriction , and also rotational restriction around the single bond , due to short range steric interaction ; and this terms we are calling as unperturbed dimension , they are 1.4 times , and multiplied by this time , so it will be around 2 to 3 times .
This was expression for the freely rotating chain , this contributes about 1.4 times , and this contributes to 1.5 to say 2.5 times , so this comes around 2 to 3 times .
So , if there is no restriction , no restriction in the chain , no restriction of bond angle and bond rotation , then whatever dimension the RMS end - to - end distance you would have got , in actually you consider the bond angle restriction , and also the bond rotation restriction that would be having the RMS end - to - end distance about 2 to 3 times , more than that .
Now , we the stiffness can be also measured by , if you get this term , this term is basically the ratio of the unperturbed dimension divided by the dimension for a freely rotating chain .
So , basically this term gives you the increase in the end - to - end distance , or increase in the dimension , because of the steric restriction both bond angle , and the rotational restriction , which means this is a parameter which predicts or which gives the idea about the stiffness of the chain .
See , in this call characteristic ratio , so the higher this value you will the polymer chain you would expect would be much more stiffer , let us compare few numbers , numbers for this steric factor , and characteristic ratio for polymers at different temperature .
Now , obviously , as we discussed we would expects polyethylene to be much less stiff than a polystyrene molecule , so this these are the steric factor and the characteristic ratio , they are higher than polyethylene , PMMA has less bulky side group , so it is expected to be lowest , you know having lower lowest stiffness than polystyrene , so it has it has this numbers lower than polystyrene .
Now , if you compare different temperature , so you take polystyrene at 25 degree centigrade , and polystyrene at 70 degree centigrade ; obviously , temperature goes up you expect that , the restriction for single bond rotation will be coming down , because you have more kinetic energy , because higher temperature , obviously , the rotational the restriction around the single bond would come down .
So , polymer actually become less stiff , and if you can you compare this numbers , numbers are also telling that polystyrene is 2.1 here , and at higher temperature and characteristic is 9.2 compared to a temperature , which is lower .
Same is the case for PMMA , if you compare PMMA , if you compare the number between 25 and 72 ; PMMA is less stiff at higher temperature , because the rotational restriction comes down as we increase the temperature .
Now , look at this number of polycarbonate , this stiffness is even lower , now what is the use of this stiffness , now when you have a polymer coil or a polymer substance , now if you impact , if you have a substance if you impact on that matrix or on the polymer substance ; obviously , the chains are flexible , then it can absorb the energy applying , so it will not break .
And if it is very stiff obviously , it will break immediately or it will break easily , as you can example glass , because glass is very stiff it breaks as soon as you hit it , whereas if you have rubber or a soft polymer , if you hit it , it would not break , it absorbs the energy because the glass chains are much stiffer compared to a rubber chains , where the rubber consists of flexible polymer chains , so they absorb the energy .
Because the polymer can change the conformation and as of the energy , now polycarbonate having lowest stiffness given by this number , so polycarbonate should be as you explains much much more impact resistance polymer compared to say PMMA or polystyrene , and which is a fact among PMMA , among PMMA polystyrene PC , polycarbonate has much more impact resistant property than the other two polymers .
Now , we so far we discussed that , how we the chain dimensions which is basically you are talking about the radius of gyration , or RMS end - to - end distance , where is we introduce the bond angle restriction , and the rotational restriction due to short range interactions .
Now , we have to compare , if you compare a polymer chain , how did we derive this Gaussian chain structure , the expression for the Gaussian chain remember , we used one of the chain end in the coordinate , x , y , z coordinate .
And then went randomly , did a random of fixed step length of one length , and then using radial distribution function Gaussian , what is the probability that the other end would be at a distance r from the origin .
Now , doing that , what we what we consider that , this polymer molecules are volume less , we are why I am drawing this , they are several intersections , if I draw like this steps vectors like this , these are the steps random of if the polymer takes .
Then there are several intersections possible , which is basically when the which is happening after several several steps , which is basically longer , it is not immediately immediately two of the segments or two of the bonds are overlapping with each other , but it can come back , because polymer chains are flexible it can come back and occupy the same space .
So , when we deduce this expression , we did not consider that these vectors have volume , so what happened the same space in this model , we consider that same space which are the intersection points can be occupied by the two two two bonds .
But , in actual sense , if you one bonds of you have said this is one bond , now what was doing in the model we were basically putting one top of it , in the same on the paper itself and we are calculating the dimension .
But in actual term because this has a definite volume you cannot put on the same paper , these two cannot intersect on the plane of paper , there would be it has to expand , because this has volume .
So , in real case , incase of real polymer chain there are long range interactions , these are long range interactions which cause the chain dimension to be generally higher than the unperturbed dimension .
Now , long range interactions are coming , because the fact that once a bond occupies a given volume in this space , no other bond can occupy the same volume , so if I have a bond here in the space , the same space cannot be , if I have this in this planes if you consider a bond , then you cannot , then like this let this plane is bond , you cannot occupy the same space with another bond .
Because it has occupying some volume in the space , but in the model we did not consider , we considered that this space can be occupied by more than one bonds .
So , once a bond occupies a volume in the space , no other bond can occupy the same space basically presence of a polymer chain of or polymer segment is excluding , any other polymer segments to occupy the same volume .
So , the term is used is excluded volume , this is called excluded volume effect , once a space is occupied by a polymer segment , the same space cannot be occupied by another segment , so that is the way we calling the other chains are excluded other portions are excluded from that space we are calling that excluded polymer effect .
So , obviously , now if the model was considering that this two can be overlapped in a line , obviously if they cannot the chain has to expand a little bit , or in other words the conformations which had list number of intersection , will have higher probability than the conformations which has more number of self interactions intersections .
Obviously , the volume , the polymer coil will expand due to this excluded volume effect , so effectively the polymer size , or the radius of gyration and the RMS end - to - end distance will also increase .
So , in real chain the RMS end - to - end distance is actually higher than the unperturbed unperturbed dimension , when we did not consider the excluded volume effect .
If we put a factor to equate them , now this has to be more than 1 , and this is called expansion factor , so if this is 1 , then these are equal if there are more expansion , then this will be higher than 1 .
Now , as you can think that this volume exclusion would be , volume expansion would be expansion or the volume exclusion would be higher , wherever the polymer chain density is much more , because if the polymer chain density is more than the chances of that two segments , or two bonds trying to occupy the same space is high .
So , the expansion would be much higher in that compared to a region , where the segment of polymer chain density is lower .
So , we cannot , that is the reason we cannot equate or put the same expression factor , in in case of radius of gyration as well , so we are putting a another expansion factor , in case of radius of gyration .
For a small expansion this can be shown theoretically that a the expansion factor for end - to - end distance higher than , expansion factor for radius of gyration .
And for large expansion it can also shown that , it is a approximately proportional to n to the power 1 over 10 , n is the number of bonds , so basically this expansion factor is approximately proportional to the molecular weight to the power 1 by 10 , where n is proportional to molecular , the molecular proportion to n , so for large expansion we will use this in future .
So , please remember that for large expansion , this expansion factor is approximately proportional to the molecular weight to the power 1 over 10 , and we know we knew that this unperturbed dimension was dependent on 10 to the power half .
So , the real chain , real end - to - end distance would be proportional to approximately proportional to this multiplied by this , which gives you 10 to the power 3 by 5 , this is approximately proportional to n to the power 315 ; the RMS end - to - end distance for a real chain .
Now , what happens when there is more than one chain , real scenario if you are talking about polymer solution or a polymer melt or a polymer mass obviously , there is no single chain they are many chains .
Now , what happened in that chain , so if there are more than one chains , there are more than one chain in real environment what will happen , now obviously , if you if you consider that this is a , this is unperturbed dimension , and because of excluded volume this is expanding to avoid all the intersections , self intersection it is expanding .
Now , what if there was another polymer here , which is the case for real case , in real case there are many polymer chains , so if you imagine this is another polymer chain ; now for self intersections or intra molecular long range steric interaction , self intersection is caused by the long range steric interactions .
They will try to expand , now if they try to expand , what will happen they will try to overlap with this chain , if they expand obviously , they will try to occupy the space which is already occupied by this chain .
Now , then they have they do not time , because there is already one segment is present , it will not allow , it will exclude the portion from the other chain to come and occupy the same space , where this will exclude any volume from the other segments .
So , obviously , the intramolecular long range interactions , steric interactions try to expand the chain , whereas intermolecular long range interactions are basically try to contract , the chain and to bring in to the unperturbed dimension .
So , there is two opposite effect when you have multiple number of chains , consider single chain intramolecular interactions long range interactions try to expand the chain , to avoid the self intersection , whereas to avoid the intersections between the segments of different polymer chain , intermolecular long range steric interactions try to compact the chain .
And that is nullified in a pure , so basically in a pure amorphous polymer this gets nullified , and your dimension becomes same as , the actual dimensions becomes same as the unperturbed dimensions .
So , in case of pure amorphous polymer , the expansion factor becomes 1 , because there is two opposite in effect causing one intramolecular causing the chain to expand , whereas the intermolecular is trying to cause the chain to compact .
What happened in the dilute solution , now in dilute solution you have polymer there are not many polymer , when you have dilute polymer chain , I wrote this this two , because you are talking about pure amorphous polymer there is no solvent .
Now , in case of dilute polymer solvent , there is unlikely that two polymer chains should be so close , so polymer polymer interaction would be this exclusion will be will be less in low probability .
So , the interaction will be between polymer and solvent , dilute solution will be interaction and polymer and solvent , now if there are if there are favorable interactions between the solvents and the polymer , compared to a solvent solvent interactions .
Obviously , the chain will expand you can you can anticipate that if the interactions between polymer solvents is favorable compared to the main interaction between solvent solvent and polymer polymer .
The polymer will try to maximize the number of polymer solvent contacts , which means it will try to expand the coil dimensions , so that you get maximum number of polymer solvent interaction , instead of solvent solvent interaction .
So , if you have good solvent , where the polymer solvent interaction is favorable compared to a solvent solvent interaction then polymer chain will expand , if you have a poor solvent where solvent solvent you know , solvent polymer interaction are not favorable .
Then what will happen , again the intramolecular intramolecular intersections or intramolecular long range interactions will try to expand .
But , on expanding it has to come in contact with the solvent molecules , with the solvent molecule solvent molecules do not like , so they will try to compact the polymer chain .
So , incase of poor solvent , a single polymer chain is tried to , because of excluded volume effect tried to expand whereas , polymer solvent interaction , because they are unfavorable to compact .
And when these two becomes equal , the polymer chain dimension is become same as the unperturbed dimension , and you have equal that solvent as a theta solvent , which basically nullified these two effects .
So , good solvent chain expansion , the expansion factor is more than 1 , if you have poor solvent chain contraction happened .
And if it is the solvent is such that , the theta solvent where the chain contraction due to unfavorable polymer solvent interaction exactly compensate , the excluded the expansion due to excluded volume effect , and you get that the expansion factor is 1 .
So , the real dimension of polymer chain becomes same as the dimensionless unperturbed that chain ; that means it is not perturbed by any other polymer or solvent .
This now you can justify the where this term unperturbed is coming , as if it is present alone , it is not perturbed by any other external molecule , whether it is another polymer molecule or a solvent molecule .
So , theta solvent again , so theta solvent and if your amorphous polymer , the dimension of a real polymer chain is same as the dimension of unperturbed chain .
So , in summary if the solvent quality is good obviously , miscibility is high , the delta g mixing is less , and if solvent quality is good in a dilute solution this change will separate , they will be isolate to each other .
And chain dimension the expansion factor will be more than 1 , so real chain end - to - end , RMS end - to - end distance will be higher than the RMS end - to - end distance for unperturbed chain .
And chi the polymer solvent interaction is be lower than 0.5 , they are all inter limited , for theta solvent chi is 0.5 expansion factor is 1 .
So , there is a still isolated and Gibbs free energy mixing , now comes from only the combinatorial entropy , which is basically small for polymer solvent system , but still negative combinatorial combinatorial entropy is positive .
So , it contribute negatively it favors the mixing process , so in theta conditions still the mixing is possible favorable and you get a soluble mixture of polymer and solvent .
If this solvent becomes more poor or poorer , it becomes , the polymer solvent interaction parameter becomes more than 0.5 and chains starts segregating and it is just close to , it is very close to your , so basically the contact interaction is positive , which is nullifying the entropy , favorable entropy contributions towards Gibbs free energy ; the favorable combinatorial entropy towards Gibbs free energy .
So , the nullify is that precipitating , and in case of non solvent when polymer segregates , Gibbs free energy mixing is positive , the polymer is insoluble , and chi , the polymer solvent interaction polymer solvent is higher than 5 .
Now , what about this , in a non solvent what about this , the polymer solvent interaction parameter becomes 0.5 , but expansion factor you can now imagine or you can think cannot be less than 1 , because it is the unperturbed dimension if you are talking about a single chain .
The unperturbed dimension is because of , the bond angle restriction and the bond rotation restriction , now you cannot have a more compact chain than that , for linear chain you cannot have a situation where there is more compact .
Because this is inbuilt to polymer chain you cannot compact , then your bond angle has to be lower , and rotational restriction has to be lower , so you cannot bring down the expansion factor , so it starts precipitating , with expansion factor of close to 1 .
Now , let us move just have a deep discussion of the , just now we talked about whatever discussion we have about the dimension is mainly or mostly all about linear polymer , which is shown here this ; now you can have branches also , you can have short branches , and you can also have long branches .
Now , long branches can have further branch from itself , so it is a long chain branching with branches , long chain branches with branches or you have a linear chain branching here or you can have a network .
Now , network have cross links points , lose ends entangled , this is entangled especially entangled between two chains , physical entanglement , there is no chemical cross linking here , it is basically one chain here entangled in another .
When you call long chain , long or short how it distinguish between whether the branch is long or short , if the branch , length of the branch is more than the entanglement chain length of the entangled molecular weight for entanglement chain length they , what is the entanglement chain length is the length between two entangled portions .
So , if the length of the branch is higher than the entanglement molecular weight , then you call that as a long chain branch , how you characterize or define the sort of gives the parameter , describe the branching ; obviously , the branched for same given molecular weight , if you have same molecular weight , because the branches the size , radius of gyration will be lower as you can expect .
So , S for the branch , you know radius of gyration for the branch will be lower than the linear for same molecular weight , so this g would be lower than , so if you can calculate these two , you can get the extent of branching , the lower is the value of g , the higher is the extent of branching .
Now , other branching parameters , you can also define is the intrinsic viscosity of branched by linear , we will have more discussion on that or the hydrodynamic radius of the branched divided by the linear ones .
So , basically if the molecular are same then because of branches are presents the chain , the polymer chain will be much more compact , so the radius , hydro dynamically radius of the radius of gyration , or the viscosity will be lower compared to linear polymer chain having the same molecular weight .
And you can , if you get this property like this viscosity or radius of gyration of these two , then you can find out the extent of branching in polymer .
Now , let us move to the next topic , which is frictional properties of polymer solution , we will basically keep our discussion limited to our dilute solutions , now we talk about frictional properties , first thing comes in our mind is viscosity .
Now , viscosity of a dilute polymers you can , you must have experienced viscosity of dilute polymer solution is considerably higher compared to solvent .
Now , that is because you have large difference in size of a solvent molecule , and the polymer molecule , because the size difference you get this large increase in the viscosity of the solvent , and that increase the extent of increase by addition of a polymer molecule .
For a given concentration would be higher if the size of the polymer goes up , so if you if you add same amount polymers of different molecular weight , in the same solvent at same temperature , then the polymer which have the hard molecular weight or higher size , it will have , the solution will have higher viscosity .
For the same for the same concentration the increase in viscosity of a polymer solution , depends on the size of the suspension in the solution , the size more size higher the size , the higher is the viscosity as we discussed .
And the size in terms depends on the chain length of the molecular weight , as we have discussed earlier , chemical structure ; chain stiffness the more higher the stiffness , the dimension of the size goes up .
And the molecular environment and chemical nature , and how what is the constitution , chemical constitution of polymer and that determine , what is the solvent given that determines how good is the polymer polymer , and polymer solvent interactions .
The more the interactions between polymer and solvent , the coil expands , so you have large size , so you have large viscosity .
So , if you have more interaction between , so if you have higher size , higher chain length obviously , the size will go up , as you have seen that we discussed just now , that the chain length goes up the molecular goes up , the size will the size will be higher , so viscosity will be higher .
If the chain stiffness goes up , the size will be up , the viscosity will be up , if there is more interaction between polymer and solvent , the size will be up and the viscosity will be up .
Now , there are few definitions of viscosity you should know this , these are common name of different viscosity , and these IUPAC name , these are most still now common names are used by many people , actually more people uses this common name than the IUPAC names .
This is eta is the viscosity of the solution of a concentration , of a polymer concentration C at a given solvent and given temperature , whereas eta 0 is the viscosity of that solvent that particular temperature , so this eta by eta 0 or the relative viscosity is gives by the extent of increase , in the viscosity by the addition of polymer at a concentration C .
And you , these are the self expanded , this expression which you can look at , specific viscosity reduced viscosity inherent viscosity , intrinsic viscosity is talked about the ability , intrinsic ability of polymer chains to intrinsic , increase the viscosity of a solvent .
So , that is , it gives us very important parameter which will be using several times in determining the molecular weight , so intrinsic viscosity relates to the intrinsic ability of a polymer , to increase the viscosity of a particular solvent at a given temperature .
Because , it is an intrinsic ability , the intrinsic viscosity is very gives lot of useful properties , lot of useful information , and which will be utilized in determine molecular weight , and other things which will discussed in next lecture .
Now , the two types of polymer chains can be imagine , one is free draining polymer chains , where the solvent molecules , when you when polymer chains moves in a solvent in a solution , polymer chains moves in a solution ; if the polymer chains moves without the solvent molecules , which are the associated with this , and the solvent molecules move past the polymer molecules .
Then we are talking about freely drained , freely draining polymer molecules , so solvent molecules flow past each segment of the chain , and you can think that it is dominate about rod - like molecule , if you molecule is stiff , if you rod like molecule , then obviously , when it moves the solvent molecules will not be sticking to it .
It will flow the solvent molecules will flow past each other ; it happens even for flexible chain if the coil size is little low , and that is dominant for this short chains .
The other one is non draining polymer molecule , which is the case for most of the polymer molecules , now in a linear flexible , any flexible polymer chains are closer to non - draining polymer molecule .
Non - draining polymer molecule is where , the solvent molecules will within the coil , coiled polymer chain moves along with it , so if I think this why it is the column , and the coil and these circles are solvent molecules when the polymer moves , it takes the solvent molecules along with it .
So , you can imagine that this polymer coiled solvent is like a impermeable sphere , which consists of the polymer coil and the solvent molecules , which are associated with the polymer chain .
And happens that happens for large flexible polymer chains long chains and this this polymer molecule can be precipitated by one equivalent , this is equivalent hydrodynamic particle , and one has the same friction coefficient as the polymer molecule .
So , this is the case , where most of the polymers will deal with deal mostly with flexible large polymer chains , so if that polymer moves to the solution , it takes the solvent molecules along with it .
So , we consider most of our polymer chains is non - draining , and the polymer coil will be thought as a permeable spherical particles .
Now , for this suspension of this rigid non non interpenetrating sphere , Einstein ’ s equation of viscosity of a suspension is given by this expression , again this is viscosity of the suspension of the solution of this is .
If you are talking about because we are thinking the polymers as hard particles ; that are why the term suspension , we are using instead of solution , but intrusion that is the solution .
So , eta is the viscosity of the polymer solution , eta 0 is the viscosity of medium , and this phi 2 is the volume fraction of the polymer chain , so what we can easily show that , this expression would give this expression .
Now , what will do now , we will stop here for this class , and we will in the next lecture , we will continue our discussion from here , and deduce the expression for intrinsic viscosity of flexible polymer chains in a dilute solution .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry and in this lecture we are going to begin our discussion on polymer stereochemistry and then follow by our discussion on coordination polymerization .
Now , we will start with our discussion on constitutional or structural isomers and then going to polymerization of conjugated dienes which will give some insight about geometric isomerization of polymers .
And then going to different types of tacticity possible in polymers , how to analyze those tacticity and how we control or we can preferentially synthesize a polymer with desired tacticity .
And then we will talk about Ziegler - Natta polymerization and then we briefly talk about metallocene polymerization and give some example of commercial coordination polymers .
Now this we will cover in this lecture and the next lecture which is lecture number 24 .
Now , let us start with our discussion on constitutional isomers which sometimes also called structural isomers .
Now , let us consider a polymer having repeat unit molecular formula of C 2 H 4 O and that is the formula of the polymer repeat unit .
Now what are the polymers possible with this molecular formula ?
We can write something like this which is PEO polyethyleneoxide or we can think of a polymer like this , which is polyacetaldehyde or we can also think something like this which all of these three we have now written ; they have all same molecular formula , this is polyvinyl alcohol .
So , basically these are the examples of constitutional or structural isomers as we know from our knowledge basic organic chemistry knowledge .
Similarly we can write other structural or constitutional isomers like we can write polyvinyl acetate which is having structure .
Now this is the structure of polyvinyl acetate .
Now you think poly methylacrylate .
Now poly methylacrylate ; you can yourself write down the structure and then find out that this has the same molecular formula as poly methylacrylate .
We can give other examples like poly PMMA poly methyl methacrylate and polyethylacrylatethey all examples of structural isomers .
Now we can also have other types of examples ; for example we know polyamide .
We can have polyamides from the diol plus diacid .
Then for example we have , say , from hexanediol plan adipic acid we form poly hexamethylene adipate .
We form this polyester .
Now we can get the same polyester by ring - opening polymerization of cyclic lactones .
We also can form similar condensation polymers like polyamides .
Now in case instead of diol if you use hexanediamine and use that adipic acid , we will get poly hexamethylene adipamide .
Now this same polyamide having polyamide having same molecular structure , molecular formula , we can get it from ring - opening polymerization of caprolcatam .
So , basically these two are again examples of structural isomers in case of polymer chemistry .
Now we also have seen during our discussion of chain polymerization synthesis that always it is the head - tail arrangement when polymer chain propagates .
It is a head - tail arrangements always preferred almost exclusively over an arrangement like head - head .
Now if you can form polymers having head to tail and head to head structure , then those will also give same molecular formula , but we know that we always get head to tail polymers in case of chain polymerization .
Now we can have let us talk about the polymerization of conjugated dienes .
This will gives us the idea about geometric isomerization .
Now let us consider the simplest of the dienes which are 1 , 3 butadiene .
Now you can have substituted 1 , 3 butadiene as well .
Now we can write general formula like this or we can write if it is substituted we can write a R instead of H and we can write this if R is CH 3 , then it is isoprene ; if R is chloride , then it is chloroprene .
Now how when you do a chain polymerization on these types of monomers , how can you imagine what are the possible polymers these monomers are forming .
For example , let us take example of this general structure and see how we can think of a different polymers producing getting produced from these general 1 , 3 butadiene type monomers .
Now let us take out a basic mode by which this monomer can polymerize .
Now if this is a 1 , 2 addition , then we will get a polymer like this .
If it is a 3 , 4 addition , we can recall the molecule ; this is one , this is two , this is three , and this is four .
So , if you have a 3 , 4 addition , then you will get a molecule like this .
Now there is another possibility of 1 , 4 addition .
In this case you get the product as this .
Now this polymer every monomer unit can stay as cis 1 , 4 polymer which gives ; you can write like this .
Now they can have a trans arrangement as well .
This is cis 1 , 4 addition ; this is trans 1 , 4 addition .
Now in the case of 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 addition , this polymer chain also can have three possible tacticities .
We will come in the discussion about tacticity in a minute , but for time being , you take my word as that these polymers which have a stereo center to acidic carbons , they can exist as three form ; isotactic , syndiotactic and atactic .
So , basically you can have three possible arrangements for these same as here .
So , you can now imagine how many possible isomers or isomeric form you can get by polymerization of this butadiene molecule 1 , 3 butadiene molecule .
Now what is the difference between these two ; this is cis arrangement of the repeat units whereas this is a trans arrangement of the repeat unit .
Now if you extend this polymer chain , you can write a cis structure like this .
Now every case if you look the structure you can write yourself ; for every repeat unit you have cis arrangement here .
Here there is a cis arrangement and for this double bond also you have a cis arrangement .
Now you should look at these molecules , this is not very regular .
As they are not very regular what happen ?
They cannot pack well in a crystal lattice and as a result this has soft polymer .
So , it has a non - regular structure .
So , do not crystallize .
Hence it is a soft material .
The T g for this is minus 73 C and T m is 28 degree centigrade .
Now if you compare this to the trans arrangement .
So basically in this case , every monomer unit has a trans arrangement .
Now you can yourself imagine this is a very regular structure which means if you have regular structures , then the polymer chains can come closer to each other and pack very well .
As a result they can crystallize easily and hence the melting point is higher 74 degree centigrade compared to 28 degree C .
So at a room temperature , this has a crystalline structure .
Crystalline domain exists in room temperature which actually gives this polymer the strength and this is a hard material .
So this is hard material , regular structure , crystallize easily .
Now , how can you think of which one is dominant product or which one is not a dominant product ?
So , in a polymerization what is the relative facts proportion of this all the possible structure we just discussed 1 , 3 addition , 3 , 4 addition and 1 , 4 addition ; obviously , between 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and 1 , 4 addition ; between these three obviously it will be the addition which will give the intermediate having lowest energy .
Obviously , b p dominant product among these three and most cases because the 1 , 4 addition gives a longer resonance stabilization in most cases , this is the preferred propagation mechanism compared to the other two .
Now once you have a 1 , 4 addition between cis and trans , if you just consider what is the possible structure of the monomer itself .
Now you can think two type of special arrangement ; one is transoid where these two double bonds are in trans and one is cisoid .
Now the confirmation or the configuration of the polymer chain will be determined by the confirmation of the adding monomer which the monomer which is getting added .
The confirmation of that monomer will determine the resulting polymer chain and between these two , the transoid structure is a much stable structure compared with cisoid structure .
So , unless there is a specific organization or specific mechanism occurring in normal cases , trans 1 , 4 will be a predominant product compared to a cis 1 , 4 product .
Now there could isomerization among the intermediate states .
Now if I write , so this is the propagating chain end .
Now this can and this will take part in resonance and it can form .
This is a chain end ; this is not the polymer , this is a chain end .
So , it could be radical , it could be cation or it could be an anion .
This is the chain end ; this monomer will come and add to this and the chain will propagate .
Now this single bond can be easily rotatable .
It can be easily we can rotate this around this single bond and if we can rotate we can get .
Now when this in resonance , it will form this chain end .
So , basically you can have one chain end with one active center and because of resonating structures , it can actually form another geometry around the double bond and now this propagates it will form a trans polymer , if this chain polymer , this chain propagates , it will be a cis product .
So , even if you have a cis chain end it can isomerize and give you a trans product .
Now that depends upon the temperature .
If your temperature is high , then there is this isomerization between this two monomer ; these two structures are highly possible .
So , there is always almost equal possibility of this propagating and this propagating which mean that the resulting polymer will be a mixture of cis and trans product at a higher temperature .
If you lower the temperature ; obviously , this isomerization become less and less probable then the most stable structure which is a trans structure will polymerize which will product .
Now if you have this R depending up on size ; obviously , you can imagine if R is high , the more the size of R , the trans product will be more dominated because the energy difference between cisoid and transoid will be much higher as you increase the size of the R .
So , if you increase size of R in absence of any specific mechanism , the trans will be higher product , and if you decrease the temperature again trans will be a higher predominant product .
Now let us look at some data .
If you take butadiene this molecule which does not have any substitution and isoprene which has a large substitution , then if we do a free radical reaction at 20 degree centigrade , you get the trans product higher .
If you increase the size of the substitution from hydrogen to metal , the size goes up .
So , your trans product is become more dominating than or in comparison to the case where there was no substitution .
Now this gives you the temperature ; compare between these two isoprene free radical polymerization at 20 degree centigrade and isoprene free radical polymerization at 100 degree centigrade .
Obviously as I explained a few minute back that if your temperature goes up the chances of isomerization provided the isomerization will be higher .
So , there will be always chances of cis and trans forming together .
So obviously if you compare this two , now there is a significant increase in the cis isomer as well .
Now what happened in case of ionic polymerization of butadiene .
So , let us again take example of , say , isoprene .
If you do in a non - polar medium and with a small counter ion , now we know in or from our knowledge about anionic polymerization that there is the anionic chain and the count ; there will always be the counter ion , say , M plus .
Now they can exist in different state if the polarity of the medium is higher , then they will slowly move from methide ion covalent bonding to tight ion pair then to free ion pair .
If the polarity of the medium is slower , then they will become closer and closer .
If you have non - polar medium they will become very tight ion pair .
Now if have tight ion pair , then the smaller the size of this counter ion , the tighter would be your interaction between the anionic part and the cationic part .
So , in this case non - polar medium and lithium counter ion , they will be remaining as tight ion pair .
Now if you use this condition and make a polymerization of , say , conjugated diene this counter ion lithium , so let us write here ; we will be very close , they are not isolated .
So when the new monomer adds , there will be a interaction , coordination between the chain end the polymer chain end or active chain end , propagating chain end and the counter ion and the monomer like this .
So , there will be an interaction between this positive counter ion and the negative propagating chain end and the new incoming monomer .
As a result now the cis this is coming from same side .
So , you will form product like .
So , this is a cis product .
So , because there is a interaction between this counter ion and the chain end and the monomer , they will form a predominantly cis product Now , if you increase the polarity of the medium then obviously , then the counter ion and the lithium will be well - separated .
And if they are well separated , obviously , there will not be any possibility of such type of intermediate formation and hence as usual the trans product will be predominant .
So , if the medium is non - polar and your counter ion size is lower , then there will be a possibility or there will be an intermediate formation by coordination between the anionic chain end and the incoming monomer .
And that will lead to cis monomer formation whereas if you increase the polarity of medium , then obviously the active chain end and the counter will be well separated , well solvated ; so there will be apart from each other , separated from each other .
So , there will not be any possibility of this type of intermediate formation .
So , as usual the trans product will be dominated .
So , if you look few data ’ s you take butadiene and isoprene ; obviously , we will compare anionic at anionic polymerization 20 degree centigrade in non - polar medium hexane , anionic polymers at almost similar temperature at non - polar medium .
Obviously because there will be a dominated cis product .
In both the cases the cis product is dominating .
If you take or increase the polarity of the medium , if you compare these two the temperature is almost closed .
If you instead take a cycloid hexane , you take diethyl ether , increase the polarity of the medium keeping any other thing , then look at this ; cis product is not that dominating now .
If you increase the polarity further then cis product will become lower and lower increasing the polarity of the medium .
Now I think with this we have completed discussion on conjugated monomer polymerization of conjugated monomers .
Now let us talk about the tacticity .
If you take a simple monosubstituted monomer and then consider what happens when this polymerize ; now we can consider a polymer where you can have two types of stereo chemistry , you can have this .
So , these two carbon atom where you have four different substitutions .
So , as you know from our knowledge if carbon has four different substitution then this is a stereo center or stereogenic center ; sometimes we also call this is an asymmertric center and it is a chiral also .
It is in chiral , the chiral center as well .
Now you can write you can name whether it is r and s .
Now that will depend up on which get priority whether this one or this one .
Now that will depend up on which is having higher length , whether there is a functional group or not .
So , we do not know ; from this structure we know whether this r and s but at least we know , if this r then this is will be s or if it s this will be r .
So , to avoid confusion sometimes it is written at small r lower case r and sometimes this is written as s .
And some cases or some people also prefer to write this is d l or we know this is d or l but if it is d then this is l ; if it is l then it is d .
So , these are the other type of nomenclature we use .
Now this cannot be this two configurations cannot be interchanged by simple rotation of around the single bond .
Now will that be optically active .
By definition this should be a chiral molecule .
So , this will be optically active .
Now if you claim that the optically activity is a very short range phenomena and that only depends upon first may be first one or two atoms or groups around this stereo center or asymmetric center .
Now in this case in a polymer , there are hardly any differences between , say , first two group or atom in this two case .
So , basically though in true sense it is a stereo center and a chiral molecule but because these are long molecules and first few molecules are same , they basically do not show any optical activity .
So , they are basically achiral in nature .
So , they do not show any optical activity .
Now you can argue that the carbon which is almost at the end and on near to the end group and obviously in the end , there will be some functional group and the other side will be the rest of the polymer chain .
So , that symmetric carbon should have some optical activity .
You are right saying that the acidic carbon atoms at the end which has one of the functional group associated instead of a polymer chain , this should be chiral and show some activity but their concentration in the polymer is so low that in practically they do not contribute any optical activity or you do not see .
Their contribution is so low that you do not see any optical activity when you get to measure the optical activity of the stereo polymers .
Now polymer also show optical activity if they are a optically active conformation .
In a macro sense , if your polymer has a , say , helical structure or something like this biomacro molecules , then their conformational structure cannot have any symmetry element which will result in the optimal activity .
Now , that happens in case of biomacro molecules where you have exclusively one such conformation present in the sample .
But in case of synthetic polymers , now these conformations , there are many conformations polymer conformations possible for single polymers and in a polymer sample the average doubt and you do not see any effective optical activity for that optically active conformation .
So , if you add the next monomer what would be the arrangement now .
Now , it can have two types of arrangement where I can have .
So , basically in this case this two molecules this two carbon atom has different configuration .
If this is r then it will be s whereas in this case they have same configuration ; if this is r then there also r .
So , that is too possible if you can add ; if you think of adding another one , you can have another two possibilities and so .
Now if all these configuration of these tertiary carbon atoms are same , then we call this is an isotactic polymerization if this is all same .
If you can think of that the next carbon also have same configuration and if they alternate , then they are called syndiotactic , this is isotactic and if there is no order , then it is called atactic which is basically random distribution .
So , if I can write this is ddddd or say rrrr , whatever way you write , then this will be the dl dl dl or rs rs rs type of configuration .
This alternate configuration of the carbons symmetric centers and in this case it will be arbitrarily atactic would bem say , ddl dlld something like that whatever you want .
This is arbitrarily ; there is no order as such .
Now why you are interested in knowing the syndiotic tacticity of the chain polymers ?
Obviously as you can expect from the structures , these two both isotactic and syndiotactic will have regular structures .
They have regular structures ; obviously , isotactic will be having more regular than symbiotic structure .
So , if I consider a molecule like , say , propylene and make polypropylene out of this ; may be you can make a isotactic polymerization , you can make a isotactic polymer of from propylene molecule .
Then isotactic polypropylene having a regular structure will slice easily and that will be hard molecule .
And if you have atactic polypropylene , then again there will not be any regularity in the chain .
So , the chains will not be able to slice easily and you will have a soft polypropylene which is of no use in practical sense .
So , if you want to have a application practical application of utility of polypropylene molecules , then you should have a regular structures like isotactic or some cases in that atactic also able to crystallize but probably in a lesser extent compared to a isotactic polypropylene .
Now we can have similar sort of tacticity in case of in case of polymers where we do not have all carbon backbone .
For example , if I do a ring - opening polymerization of ethylene oxide which we discussed in the last lecture .
Now you can imagine placing , let us take consider propylene oxide as shown .
So , here again you can have if you have same configuration of this carbons then this is like this .
This is a same configuration ; if you have same configuration from all the molecules you will again have isotactic , if you have alternate configurations then you have syndiotactic and if their configurations are not any regular , they are not arbitrarily placed , then you can again call this is as atactic polymers .
Now in this case unlike polypropylene or other the carbon - carbon chain polymers , if you consider these carbon which is asymmetric in nature , then in this case , this two polymer residues ; in this case , this one and this one , they are actually different in nature .
Unlike the polymers the chain polymers we have only carbon - carbon backbone , in this case they are different ; like in this case you have oxygen next molecule atom and this is CH 2 molecule .
So , in this case you expect that this will show optical activity unlike , say , molecule like polypropylene and indeed they do show optical activity .
These types of polymers actually show optical activity .
Now how do you synthesize ; what are the ways you can synthesize , what are the strategies you can take to synthesize one particular stereo regular polymer like isotactic polymers or syndiotactic polymers ?
As you know by this time that it is always recommended or beneficial to make or synthesize polymer having a definite stereo regularity whether it is isotactic or syndiotactic , they always have more helpful or more polymers which will have more utility compared to atactic polymers .
Now which one of these three possible stereo arrangements which will be dominated that again determined by the medium where you are doing and of course , the initiation mechanism as a cationic mechanism or radical mechanism you have taken .
For example if I consider c s , that is the terminal carbon atom which is an active center .
Let us consider this is a propagating chain whether this is an active center ; now it could be radical , it could be anionic , or it could be cationic .
Of course if you have a cationic then you have an anionic counter ion .
If you have an anionic then you have a cationic counter ion .
Now what are the geometries of these carbon atoms , what is the hybridization ?
If this is a radical , then obviously this is s p 2 .
If it is carbocation , then also it is s p 2 .
Now if it is carbon anion , then ideally it should be s p 3 but because you have a substituted group substitution here R , now we know this the monomers which undergo anionic polymerization , they actually get stabilized by resonance with this substitution .
If you remember , say , acrylonitrile or methyl methacrylate where this anion charge get delocalized by resonance with the substitute group and this requirement of resonance with the substituted group again makes this as planar .
So , this is actually this carbon is having a planar structure irrespective of s p 2 whether it is radical , carbocation or carbon ion .
Now that will change if your counter ions are very tightly bound with the carbon atoms .
If you have a anionic group and a carbon ion and if your counter is tightly bound , say , if you have lithium plus , you are doing a reaction with a n butyl lithium in a non - polar medium , then this carbon ion c minus will be having very strong tight ion pairs as we discussed in case of that conjugated diene polymerization ; they will be very tight .
Now in this case , this will not be a planar .
This carbon will not have a planar geometry .
So , first let us discuss where either you have a radical or you have a cation , carbocation or a carbon anion where the counter ions are free ; they are not tightly bound .
And if they are free that happens in a polar medium , then as we discussed now , you can consider this carbon the terminal carbon as a planar molecule ; it has a planar geometry .
Now if it has a planar geometry , when the next monomer comes in because it is a planar it can come from both the sides .
So , there is no special and so it can come from this or it come from this side as well .
So , no special preference of or hindrance from one of the other side ’ s ; let us wipe it off to avoid confusion , this one .
So in general case , if you are talking about radical polymerization of or ionic polymerization where you have the counter ions are free , then the stereo chemistry of this carbon atom will be determined once the next monomer gets in .
So , what happened ?
This is the monomer which I have written here at the end now .
So , what happened for this , the configuration of this carbon ?
Which side now the hydrogen and R will come ?
Obviously , they will prefer because R is up .
So , now , R will prefer to be at down and hydrogen will prefer avoid the steric hindrance .
So , unless there is a specific mechanism in normal case , there will always be syndiotactic would be a preferred tacticity .
Now again this bond this bond they can fully rotate .
So obviously , if the temperature is higher , then it can rotate and form the isotactic polymer as well isotactic linkage and in that case if there is a random orientation of two asymmetric carbon atom , then you are going to get a syndiotactic molecule .
So , if you decrease the temperature you are going to increase the concentration , the tendency of syndiotactic formation and if you increase the temperature then their preference would be lost .
So , we can write this two approaches when to rate constant when k r and k m where k r is the rate constant for the syndiotactic addition , r means racemic to consecutive carbon they will have different configuration .
So , we are writing k r and k m for the measure which will give the isotactic addition ; this is syndiotactic addition .
Now their ratio will determine which product gets dominated and that will get determined by the difference in the activation gives few energy between the two molecule where we can write like this , where this del del l star and del del H star is the difference in the activation energy different activation entropy and this is the difference in the activation energy between the two routes .
One is syndiotactic and atactic formation and from experiment data we get this around minus 4 to minus 8 kilo Joule per mole and this we get around 0 to 4 Joule per mole .
So , this is very low .
So , the preference one after one over 1 would be determined by the reference in their activation energies and if they increase their temperature , there will be no preference between this two .
And hence there will be tendency for any of the two stereo regularity formations which will lead to atactic molecule atactic polymer .
If you reduce the temperature of previously , there will be increased tendency of syndiotactic polymer formation .
So if you increase the temperature , then we will get more of a syndiotactic polymers and again this we are talking about where you have either we are talking about radical polymerization or anionic or cationic polymerization where we are carrying out the polymerization in a polar medium where you have the counter ion and the active centers they are free as they are existing as a free ion .
Now what we will do in the next lecture ; we will discuss the strategy how we can and how those ionic polymerization can or would give the isotactic polymerization .
As you have seen that with decrease in temperature we get preferentially syndiotactic formation ; if we increase the temperature we get atactic formation .
So , how to get isotactic polymers ; we will discuss that in the next lecture .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry , and to this lecture we will continue our discussion we are having on amorphous and crystalline state , and we will have discussion on glass transition temperature , and melting point of polymers .
Now , if you look at this slide , this is the topic these are the topics we thought of covering in this amorphous and crystalline state .
We have covered in last lecture our introductory discussion on amorphous and crystalline polymers , and then we discussed what is glass transition temperature , and melting temperature for polymers .
We discussed that glass transition temperature is a secondary transition , glass transition is a secondary transition , and melting is a first order transitions for polymers .
We also discussed in detail about the relationship between chemical structure , and glass transition temperature .
And in today ’ s lecture we are going to discuss the relationship between the chemical structure of a polymer , and the melting point .
We will discuss today about , how the measurement techniques used for T g and T m , will not have detail discussion but the basic discussion , basic technique on determining T g and T m .
And we will also discuss little bit about other thermal responses in other , other responses polymer shows when you heat up a polymer material .
Just a recap , the factors which will that influence glass transition temperature , mainly we can divide in two factors ; one is free volume , free volume is the volume in polymer material , which is not covered by the polymer molecules , and as we have seen that , if we increase the free volume content in a polymeric material or sample , the polymers has more space to move around , so mobility goes up .
And hence the effect of , it affects the glass transition temperature , and will also effects the melting point .
Second major of the main contribution in deter or determining factor in T g is the , freedom of the polymer chain to rotate around its single bond , which gives us the mobility of the polymer chain .
So , if you increase the mobility , obviously polymer chain becomes more flexible , and T g goes down .
So if you go back , and look at these factors we discussed in last lecture .
If you have a digit backbone , digit group in the backbone , then T g goes up , as a result of increase stiffness .
Flexible backbone , obviously T g goes down , if you have the steric hindrance , because of presence of bulky side groups or side bulky pendant groups , then the rotation around single bond becomes difficult , as a result stiffness goes up and T g goes up .
If you have long plastizing side group , then obviously free volume goes up , and T g goes down .
Similar symmetrical substituent we have seen , that T g brings down polar functionalities will increase the intermolecular or interpolymer attractions , which will increase the T g .
Plasticizer increase the free volume , T g goes down , and cross - linking also decreases the amount of free volume , so T g goes up .
Now this are some of the factors , we try to include , and will see that most of this factors also influence the value of T m , because T m and T g are very closely related phenomenon , so this factors also will contribute , may be , may not be in same extent or same nature same way , but they also contribute , in determining value of the glass transition temperature .
What about the T g of co polymer , we talked about mainly last class T g of homopolymers , now what about in the T g co polymers and polymer blends , if we talk about co polymers first .
Now co polymers , you can have random co polymers .
Now if you have random co polymers , obviously they form a single phase , because they individual monomers does not make a .
They are not distinct to each other , in the sense that their statistical co polymer , so you have a single phase for that .
And if you have a single phase , this gives as a single T g for the co polymer .If you have a block co polymer , now if the block is , the blocks involved here are invisible with each other , then we have multiple phases .
For example , if we are talking about two blocks , then , if they are not miscible to each other or other way invisible to each other , then you have two phases .
Then we have multiple T gs , each T g represents the T g for the corresponding homopolymer .
So , if you have two blocks , which are not visible , then we are going to get two T gs for the corresponding homopolymer .
Now if , please remember that , if the sign this T g , the T g of the homopolymer in a block co polymer , will depend upon the size or the molecular weight of co polymers , as you we know that the T g also depends on the molecular weight , of the polymers , so if we talk about the small block , then we are going to get slightly less T g , then a large homopolymer , so that part you have to keep it in mind .
That if you take a small block , then T g will be lower compared to the homopolymer , which have a higher molecular weight .
If these blends are miscible sorry this co polymers the two blocks are miscible , then obviously you are going to get single phase , and which will give as a single T g .
Similarly , if you take two homopolymers , and blend them , if we have invisible , again similar thing , then you have invisible multiple phases , multiple T gs .
If we are talking about , say two homopolymer blend , so multiple T g , if they are visible , obviously single phase , and you have single T g .
For invisible blend , it does not matter that , you know that T g is for the homopolymers , obviously then you can know you will know the T gs for the block co polymer immiscible block co polymer , or invisible blends .
What is the T g for invisible blend , if you mix ; say component one and component two , and then mix with each other or you make a block co polymer of one and two , which becomes invisible , then what is the T g .
The two equations which you can apply , this T g is for the resulting co polymer , or the blend , visible blend , which is given by W 1 T g 1 plus W 2 T g 2 .
T g 1 is the T g for the component one , W 1 is the weight fraction .
Similarly , W 2 is the weight fraction for the component two , and T g 2 is the weight fraction for the second component .
Now this equation gives linear or straight line variation , linear variation with composition .
So if you composition , you get linear variation by this equation .
Now this generally what estimates the T g of the co polymers or blends slightly slightly .
So the other equations , used are given by this one by T g W 1 by T g 1 plus W 2 by T g 2 .
Again this terms are same , remember this t , this T g is are in Kelvin .
So , don ’ t confuse that , for applying this equations , you must take the temperature in Kelvin .
Now this case ; obviously this equation , predicates the curve , a curve below the straight line , with composition .
So , if you have a straight line here , it will little curve below that , and is typically under estimates , is basically to be little , under estimates little bit about the T gs for the miscible blends , or the co polymer .
Hence the actual T g lies between a T g which is somewhere between , predicted by this two expression .
Now obviously if these two blocks , in a block co polymers or say two homopolymers in blends are partially visible , then what happens , you still gets two T g s , for a two component system , but if T gs comes down from the corresponding homopolymers , you get a somewhere intermediates .
So , basically if you find out , or if you measure the T gs or deputed a defensive thermal kilometric , which will just stop in a minute .
We will find depending how T g you are getting , you estimate , or you can predict or you know , whether the blends are miscible blends , or they are partially miscible blend or there completely miscible blend .
Similarly , you can find this is whether blocks , that the two block in a block polymer , and miscible or partially miscible , or completely immiscible .
So if you want show this in peterocially , if you are two face system immiscibly system you get corresponding , two T g corresponding to the homo polymers , and if you have completely mixed or miscible blend , miscible copolymers , then you have T g intermediate between these two .
The value of this T g is given by the two expressions I just wrote in it .
We will come to T m and melting point , before coming to melting point discussion , let us just recap with the crystallizing polymer , which we discussed in length last lecture .
Crystalinity polymer as you know as we discussed many times in this course ; that polymer are hardly crystallize up to hundred percent , so most cases if they , the crystality varies from zero hundred polymers , so polymer are generally semi crystalline in nature .
And you have non equilibrium micro structure , co existing the amorphous and the crystalline region .
We talk about non equilibrium , because when we introduce crystalinity in the polymers , the amount and the nature of the crystalinity depends upon how you are inducing the crystalinity , whether it fast or it slow .
So the micro structure you get consisting amorphous crystalline region , are basically non equilibrium structure .
And that micro structure actually determined eventually , the properties of material .
We also discussed requirement for crystallization ; basically the polymer chain has to have a regular molecular structure , so that the chains can pack close to each other easily , and obviously if the inter molecular force between the polymer chains higher , then they can pack easily , or if they remain pack easily , which are they .
So these are the two criteria ’ s must be fulfilled , so to get a crystalline polymers .
How do you induce crystalinity in a polymer material .
Remember we discussed last class that , generally we can introduced a by cooling a molten polymer , or annealing a semi crystalline or amorphous polymer is specific temperature , and then is just keeping a amorphous semi crystalline polymer at a particular temperature for a long time .
You can introduce crystallinity by evaporating a polymer solutions slowly , and the another way we can introduce crystallite by drawing , which basically means stretching the polymer strain , so polymer chains at a particular temperature about T g , by which they can align , and then crystallize with each other .
So what are factors that influence the value of melting point or melting temperature .
Let us think about the thermo dynamics little bit , we know that .
So if we consider delta G of melting , delta G of a processes , we can write T d S m .
Now these are the delta G m , delta G , delta G m and delta S are the corresponding terms for particular , per unit for per .
Now at equilibrium , which is a case of melting , so at melting , delta G m would be zero , T is T m melting point .
Hence T m is given by delta H m , delta S m .
Let me once delta H m by delta S m .
Delta H m is melting is always endothermic processes , so this is a positive value .
Similarly , entropic change in melting processes , result in increasing in , mobility of the polymer chains , so at the entropic goes up .
So if you , from this expression if you can increase the value of T m , either by increasing the value of del H , and by decreasing del S value .
If del H can be increased , by improving the inter molecular attraction , if you increase the inter molecular attraction between the polymer chains , then obviously the delta h of melting goes up .
Similarly , if the entropy denies term , can be reduced , then the T g goes up .
We will discuss the specific example in a minute now .
So , this is what I discussed that delta G m is delta H m minus T deltas delta m enthaply and entropy of fusion , for melting per repeat unit , at equilibrium delta Gm zero , so this is zero .
So to increase T m with this chain stiffness mobility , if we increase chain stiffness , we increase the chain stiffness , if we increase the chains stiffness what happened .
When we melt these polymers , if they are stiff , if the polymer is stiff , then the increased entropies is not much .
Obviously , if you have more flexible chain , then from to bring the chains from closeting to molten state , where the polymers have much more mobility .
If the polymers are intrinsically more flexible ; obviously for flexible polymer on melting delta is goes up more , than a polymer chains which are much stiffer .
So to increase T m , you prefer to have a stiffer chain , because if you have stiffer chain , then the entropies increase and melting is less , so T m goes up .
Similarly , you can increase the inter more attraction , you can introduce some specific bonding ; like hydrogen bonding , that will increase the enthalpy , the delta h of melting , and by that we can increase the melting point , and obviously better packing is always help in increasing the , you can understand better packing is always improve the T m melting point of the polymer .
So , what are the… If you look chain micro structure , or chain chemical structure , what are the factors , you can think of , which will affect the value of T m .
Obviously , we discussed back bone stiffness , now I will give few examples , so that we can verify this concept .
So let us talk about first this example ; polythene have T m around 137 to 146 degree centigrade .
If you introduced a flexible group in the back bone , then flexibility goes up , so delta S goes up , so your T m goes down so it comes around 122 .
If you just have a ether linkage , then flexibility goes up even higher , you get it drop in T m value .
If you introduced a phenyl width in the back bone , your stiffness will go up , and you get a much higher T m value , increased T m value as a result of increase in the back bone polymer chain stiffness .
We can give more example of back bone stiffness .
For example if we consider these polyesters , when R is c h 2 4 , c h 2 4 is linear alkane .
Normal alkane , which gives us very flexible chain , and T g T m is 50 degree centigrade , if you increase much stiffer molecule group .
So we are giving example of this back bone stiffness , which will affect the value of T m , so if you have a much stiffer back bone , by introducing rigid phenyle group , the T m goes up to 70 degree centigrade .
If you have more stiffer group , then the T g T m sorry T m goes up even higher .
If you introduce a flexible group in between , then T m goes down .
Whereas , instead of c h 2 c h 2 , if you have alpine group , which makes the chain even stiffer , then your T m goes up drastically .
So , the example we have seen in this page , and in this page , confirms the understanding that if we increase the back bone stiffness , the T m goes up .
Now let us talk about the second factor polarity , let us have some example about poly - amides .
So , if you have more flexible group , instead of C H 2 C H 2 , for examine three groups , three C H 2 groups , then the polymer becomes the contributions from this C O N H 2 group in this case , is higher compare to this case , because your adding more non polar groups .
Hence the inter molecular attraction goes down , hence T m goes down , so 260 degree .
If you increase further , then T m goes down further .
Now in this case , you can argue that , this drop in T m could be , because of the increasing flexibility of the back bone , but you write it can cause some decrease in the T m , because of increase flexibility , but the amount of drop shown here , that can be only explain by the decrease in the inter molecular attraction , because of the fraction of the c u n h group , is less in this polymer chain , compare to the one shown here .
Similarly , you can compare nylon 6 6 265 and nylon 6 10 is 222 .
Here also , because you have , for given molecular weight you have less number of C O N H group , the T m goes down .
The third factor we can think of is , back bone symmetry , and pendent group regularity .
If you consider this example , when x is 8 ; that means polyethylene T m is 137 to 146 degree .
When this is C H 3 , if you have C H 3 group , the polymer chain becomes more stiffer .
Hence the T g goes up , but if you increase the length of the side chain , as you have seen in case of T g as well ; that the chain rotation is mainly determine by first one or two pendent groups .
If you have a longer pendent groups , it actually plasticizes the polymer molecules , by increasing the free volume .
So if you increase this pendent group , what happened , it increase the free volume ; hence the flexibility goes up , and as a result your T m goes down .
So if you increase further , your T m further goes down .
However if you have same thing you have seen for T g , in case of T g , if you have bulky side group , not a long not long pending grouping from the chains , but if you have a bulky groups , then this contributes or gives steric hindrance in rotation , and which increases stiffness .
Where in this case , its free volume increases , and flexibility of the polymer chain increases , because of the increase in free volume .
So in case , the stiffness goes up , and as a result the T m goes up , and if you have , even bulkier group , then the T m goes up further .
So it is basically the pendent group which .
So , basically we are talking about pendent group size , we are not talking about this , we are talking about pendent group size and type .
So depending on what is the type and size of the pendent group , the melting point gets influenced .
If you compare , give one example here .
Not this one .
So let us go back and look at this slide , we have discussed the back bone stiffness , we have discussed the polarity , we have discussed effect of pendent group size and type .
Obviously if you have branches present in the polymer chain , it hinders in crystallization , so crystallization become difficult , so it affects the T m .
And if you have pendent polar troops , then it effects , or if a pendent polar group obviously , the inter molecular attraction goes up , and as a result T m will go up .
If you have pendent groups present on the substituent present regularly , then it is easy to pack or packing it becomes better , so T m goes up .
If the pendent groups are not placed symmetrically , then the T m goes down .
So , as a general factor we can say that , only linear polymers can form crystals , if the branches present in the polymer chain , it does not form crystals , or it does not crystallizes .
Stereoregularity in a polymer molecule , is critical , so if syntactic or iso - tactic polymer will have bitter crystalline , crystal ability , then ataractic polymers co - polymers are .
We talking about random co polymers , where their due to the molecular irregularity , they rarely form crystal .
Obviously , if you have cool the polymer melt slowly then , the crystal , the polymers gets , polymers chains gets more time , and they can crystallize , and the crystallize crystallization take place easily , or the crystallize can grow in bigger size .
Molecular also influence the value of T m , this , because as you have seen in case of T g as well , that if we the chain ends are having much more free volume , so the end of polymer chains are much more flexible .
So if you have a sorted chain , then the polymer is effectively more flexible , T g goes T m goes down , and if you have a higher chain the contribution from the ends is less , so T m goes up .
So this is one example of normal alkanes as shown , that with increasing the chain length number of carbon atoms , the T m values goes up and eventually it is become a steady value .
So if you want to compare between two polymer chains , it is preferably to compare in high molecule rate , so that the T m is almost independent of the molecular weight .
Now , we discussed the concept of T g and T m , and we also discussed the chemical , how the T g and T m depend on the chemical structure of a polymer chain .
Now we will move and briefly discussed , how we determine , or measure T g and T m in laboratory .
We have discussed this that , there are lots of physical properties changes , during the glass transition and melting , some of the them are listed here , specific volume changes , specific heat capacity , refractive index , modulus , heat conductivity .
There are many others which can be in list , but these are some of the examples , some of the physical properties , undergo change their value during glass transition , and melting .
So if you can follow any of this property with temperature , we can find out the glass transition temperature , and melting point .
The most basic techniques , which are used in laboratory for determining T g and T m are , the D S C and D T A .
The D S C is different term ; differential scanning calorimetory , and differential thermal analysis .
So D S T stands for differential scanning calorimetory , and differential D T A stands for differential thermal analysis .
What is the principle of D S C and D T A .
In D S C you typically have a chamber , where a sample is placed .
So that is your sample S , and you have reference , which is empty .
There is a heater , two sample heater , E s supplies energy , they is a thermo couple , sample thermo couple T s .
Similarly , here you have a reference heater , and you have reference thermo - couple , which determines the temperature .
Thermo - couple determines the temperatures of sample , and T r thermo - couple determine the temperature of the reference there is a gas inlet , typically with your experiments in inner atmospheric , so they is a gas inlet and a gas outlet .
So what is done in this experiment ; the sample and the reference which is just a blank .
Sample are typically taken in a aluminum container , and then the aluminum container can be covered and creamed , so that nothing goes out , from the container , and parallelly they is a blank container without sample is kept .
This two are heated , and the temperatures are maintained same .
The temperatures for this sample , and the reference are kept maintain same .
And to maintain the same temperature the heat or energy is supplied to the sample .
If there are something happen , some exothermic and endothermic reaction going on , so if there is some exothermic in exothermic transition or reaction happened here , then to maintain the temperature , the system has to supply more energy from outside , to maintain the temperature .
So basically in this case , energy supplied is plotted against temperature .
If they is a endothermic process goes on , in the sample , then you have to supply energy from outside .
If some exothermic process goes on , then heat get evolves in the samples .
So to maintain the same temperature between the sample and reference , you have take out some energy , so delta E becomes negative .
So if you consider a process , typically what happened , there is always the delta is neighbor is zero , because there is always a difference between , difference in the heat capacity between the sample , and the reference .
So you have to always supply more heat , or at least different amount of heat , higher heat energy , to keep the sample at the same temperature as the reference .
So delta S is always positive , neighbor is not equal to zero , due to difference in heat capacity of sample , and the reference , to keep .
So this , again this delta is the amount of energy , or the heat we have to supply to the sample , to keep the sample and the reference temperature same .
So delta will be proportional to the difference in the heat capacities , between the sample , heat capacities of the sample , and heat capacity of the reference .
So if they is no change in heat capacity of the sample , then the value of the daily will remain same , which will give pass the base line .
So if you start , daily will start somewhere and remain same , as long as the heat capacity of the sample remains same .
Now say , the sample is undergoing glass transaction temperature , if sample goes glass transaction temperature , which is a endothermic processes , so the system has to supply more energy , so delta will higher , and then once the glass transaction is over , then it will be same , again remain constant , because the heat capacity of the robbery state is higher , typically higher than the glassy state .
The delta is e value will be higher in the robbery state , correspondence to corresponding to , or compare to a glassy state .
And this difference will give the delta c p between the glassy state , and the rubbery state , now this if you increase further the temperature .
Now if it continuing , a term , a time will come when these polymer samples undergo melting , and you get a peak correspondence to the melting of the polymer , so you get a curve like this .
In case of D T A ; differential thermal analysis , a similar concept is applied , where you have a chamber , which has a inbuilt heater .
This is a heater , and you have sample , and again you have a reference , you have a thermo - couple for the sample , a thermo - couple for the reference .
There is a place to put the gas inside , and there is a gas outlet is also there .
In this case what happened heat is supplied , at a particular rate in the system , and difference in the temperature , between the sample , and the reference is observed .
So in this case , delta T is a temporary difference between the same , and the reference is plotted against the temperature .
So if there is a exothermic processes , delta T will be higher as a result of increase in heat , inside the sample .
If there is a endothermic processes , there will be delta T will be lower correspondence to the difference , because you were supplying constant amount of energy to the system .
So if you plot the same graph , like we did for D S C , we get it deep at T g glass transaction temperature , and melting t you get exo peak , so this is T g and T m .
So in the case of D S C , the temperature between reference and the sample is kept constant , and the required energy is supplied , so delta e is the amount of energy required , to keep the temperature between the sample and the reference same , is plotted against t .
And in case of D T A difference thermal analysis , the same amount of heat is supplied to sample and reference , at a constant rate , and the difference in the temperature between the sample and the reference , is plotted against the temperature .
So any face change , which involves any glass transaction or melting , which is endothermic processes , will require more heat , to maintain the temperature , and ideally this should be a sharp increase here .
But as all of us know , that the polymer sample consist of many chains of different length , so the T g corresponding to each chains are different , so that is why we get a board nature of this transition , because each higher size polymers will have slightly have T g correspondence to compare to a polymer chain having , lower size .
Similarly , the T m is little less sharp , compare to a small molecular melting point , because the polymer chain has many molecular weight ; basically consist of chains having many molecular weights .
Now this T g , we will talk about this D S C , how T g obtained .
Mathematically , if we draw this portion again we can , so that is end of.. ... So , different scientists use different techniques or different techniques to find out the T g .
Some uses this inflection point , the inflection point as T g .
Many uses or that is the most used technique , where .
There is an inflection point here , and there is a inflection point here .
The midpoint of these two , some people consider this as a T g , and some cases what happened , the point where there is a maximum change in the slope , during this inter temperature in the slope changes , keep on changing .
So the point where the maximum change in slope happens , some people consider that as a T g .
Now this and this is very close to the midpoint of this change over .
So generally if nothing is mentioned .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
In last lecture , we started our discussion on polymer properties , and their evaluation .
And in last lecture we discussed mainly mechanical properties , the stressed in behavior in tensile testing .
We also discussed the other testing behavior like , impact testing , and flexural testing or bending testing .
At the last lecture what we discussed was the relationship between the mechanical properties , and chemical structure or polymer chain properties .
And we found that in general , flexible backbone , if you have a flexible polymer chain backbone Obviously , if I want to write here , if you have a flexible polymer chain backbone , then it is easier for somebody to apply stress and deform .
Now with which basically gives lower modulus , lower strength , however the same flexible behavior can be helpful in case of impact properties .
Why , if you impact , because of its flexibility it can absorb that impact energy more effectively , and gives you a higher impact strength or it does not give a better facture on getting hammered by a impact or gamma by a load .
So , flexible backbone gives lower modulus and strength , and chain stiffness of the backbone and the bulky side groups , increases modulus , and strength which is self - explanatory .
If you talk about backbone stiffness , then they increase the modulus , and strength .
Increasing stiffness also gives lower impact strength , and elongation at break , because if you a stiff back bone , you cannot elongate before it breaks .
For a same , we also have seen that the modulus on mechanical properties , of a polymer , very much dependent on the temperature of the experiment , which means finally , if we when you using the polymer in a particular application , you must remember the temperature of the application .
And second , the strain rate , if you think about the application with the material will come up , come across some load , which will come at a higher strain rate , then the behavior will be different , if you talking out just simply dead load bearing capacity of the material .
So , modulus and other strength , or elongation at break , which means we are talking about brittleness .
All this mechanical properties depends on temperature of experiment , and the strain rate or the stress rate .
If you compare semi crystalline material , semi crystalline polymer at same temperature , and same rate .
Obviously , we know that with increasing crystalinity , the modulus and strength goes up , whereas with a if we cross link this material with cross linking , the modulus goes up .
Now , let us talk about great dilemma in case of polymers .
Now we know that , or you can anticipate , that the properties ; mainly mechanical properties of a polymer materials , which should increase with molecular weight .
It does increase , and then become steady after very high molecular weight .
So , basically good properties are favored by high molecular rate of polymers .
So , this is nothing unusual , so you should expect this being .
So , that is the advantage of a polymer .
So , high volume molecular weight , it gives the mechanical properties .
Other properties do not changes in molecular that much , though it also increases with molecular weight , but it does not keeps on increasing , even if it slightly with molecular weight , the other polymer will study it at a high molecular weight .
Whereas , we have seen that , you after making the synthesizing the polymer you have to go through the processing step , to make the final part .
So , you must make some polymer , some molecular weight we should be able to pass through the processing step , so that you can get the final product .
And process ability actually becomes easier , as you can understand the , if the lower the at the molecular weight lower at the viscosity , so process ability becomes easier , if you have the low molecular weight .
So , processing good processing is always favored by low molecular weight .
So , e is a processing will , means the high her the molecular weight , it will be difficult for process , so e is a processing will be lower , with increasing molecular weight .
Now , just to spend a minute why these are processing is so much dependent or molecular weight .
Just talk about Rheology and entanglement of polymer molecules .
The elastic properties of linear thermo plastic polymers , are due to chain entangle .
do we the We described in last lecture that , the elastic that the resistance to deformation , is due to the chain entanglement , because of presence , because of chain entanglement , the chains are presence other , may be intra molecularly , or other chain , the intra molecular chains segments are present in the vicinity of a particular polymer chain , which basically resist the deformation .
So , if you have some polymer molecular weight , which is polymers which is having molecular weight , such a small number , such a small value that it does not entangle mean entangle efficiently .
Then we do not get the desire property of a polymer material , which will be useful for the applications of the polymers we usually use .
Entanglements will occur for polymer chains above a critical molecular weight , and we call that molecular weight as entanglement molecular weight M E .
Now if you look at the experimental value of a viscosity versus molecular weight of a polymer ; viscosity tilled entanglement molecular weight , viscosity increases steadily with a slope of one , but above entanglement molecular weight the polymer chains and the entanglement .
If the polymer chains and entangled , the polymer chains and entangled , then moving fast each other , going fast each other , is become more and more difficult , very difficult because they are entangles , so the viscosity becomes much higher after the entanglement .
So , before entanglement , the viscosity scales to the , with the power of one , with molecular weight , whereas the slope changes to about 3.4 , after the entanglement molecular weight .
So , if you increase the molecular weight further , above this entanglement molecular weight ; the viscosity goes up drastically , and the processing , these are processing become difficult and difficult more difficult .
See always you want a polymer somewhere ; above the entanglement molecular weight , and just above the molecular weight , so there it can be processed easily .
So , this is the dilemma which molecular it should make , it will make high , very high molecular weight ; your properties will be higher .
Similarly the same time you lose the processibility to the way difficult to process .
So , you have to have some compromises , you have to make molecular weight somewhere intermediate , so you get the best of both .
In case of thermosets , you do not need that compromise , because thermosets are generally starts with low molecular weight polymers , and you make the final product or you process that low molecular weight , and then subsequently you cross link that , to increase cross link or cure in other term , and increase the molecular weight , so you do not have to compromise anything .
Whereas , in thermo plastics you have to compromise between these two , you have to choose a molecular weight somewhere in between , so that your mechanical properties is just above a critical value of your requirement , and your process ability also is handable , means you can do processing .
So , high enough molecular weight to get adequate properties , and low enough molecular weight , so that it can be processed , so you have to compromise between these two .
We talk about continue our discussion on mechanical properties , and we come to a concept of viscoelasticity .
We have seen in our discussion , when we were doing this as stress strain curve , we have seen that the curve stress stain curve depends upon the temperature , as well as the strain rate .
Now if you think about the pure elastic material , if we stretch a crystalline solid what happens ?
The energy stored in the material , and if we in the chemical bonds , and then if you release that stress , it will come back to the original state .
We are talking about this is a ideal elastic behavior .
Similarly if you have a liquid , then if you apply strain stress , if I have a liquid glass of water , and then pour it , then it will basically flow it , if I remove the stress it does not come back to the original state .
So , in case of a liquid , or a fluid if I apply as a shear stress to a fluid , energy dissipated in fluid , basically flows and energy is dissipated , energy is not stored .
So , in case of elastic material energy is stored , in case of a fluid , energy is not stored , and it dissipated in the flow , so it a ideal viscous behavior .
Now polymers are somewhere in between , they have depending upon the temperature , and time of straining it .
They vary from elastic to , completely elastic to completely viscous behavior , and most of him in the conditions they are viscoelastic , so they have properties of both ideal solid , and viscous liquid or viscous fluid .
So , polymers are both ideal elastic and viscous behavior , depending on the time and the temperature , so we call polymers are viscoelastic .
At low temperature and high strain rate , polymer demonstrates elastic behavior , as we have seen earlier in our strain stress discussion .
There are low temperature polymer becomes brittle , it does not elongate much .
So , polymer behavior , elastic behavior similar in high strain rate also , at temperature and high temperature and low strain rate , polymer demonstrate viscous behavior , and an intermediate temperature , the rate of and rate of strain polymer big demonstrate viscoelastic behavior .
Now you can seen this viscoelasticity behavior if you have a silly putty , the toy material silly putty in home , but I do not have that material with him .
So , I have , what I have , I have the dove made of wheat flour , and I just made this dove from wheat flower , I just put some water to make it soft .
Now basically what happened , this is not a ideal viscoelastic material to demonstrate , but I can show it , so that you can understand what do I mean by viscocity .
this is a dove made up of wheat flour , and when I stretch this slowly , what happens , it just elongates , is basically it flows , so it keep on increasing if I apply this stress , or strain in a slower rate , so its keeps on stretching .
Now , if I apply this strain rate , high strain rate from both sides , much faster strain rate what happen , what happen , let us see what happens .
Again I am saying this is not a example of a perfect viscoelastic material , but this is what , I have in hand , at this moment to demonstrate , so I am trying with whatever available at home .
Now I have this and I do it very fast , what happened , it just breaks .
So , what happened , again I am saying is not a perfect material to show , if you apply the strain at much faster rate , it breaks , it shows elasticity , elastic behavior , like a solid , but when you apply this strain very slowly , then it flows up chains , actually move past each other , shows flows behavior and it shows viscous behavior .
So , if I consider the strain stress curve , how does it look like , for a viscous and elastic material .
First of all when we do instant testing , we… One thing we must remember that ; as we do this test , the dimension of the specimen changes .
So , actually thus the strain , and the stress , or the state actually changes , because the original dimension changes .
So , this are the term sometime used ; engineering stress is F force by original A , and true stress is changing , is actually basically the force by the area at given time , by similarly engineering strain is given by dL by this original length .
Whereas true strain would be the L at a given time ; that is the true strain .
This true stress and this true strain is difficult to measure .
So , generally we actually consider engineering stress and engineering strain all the time .
Let us see how the stress strains behavior of this visco elastic material .
Now let us see I apply , this is stress or load .
I apply some time t 0 , and keep at a constant level for some time , and then release again , make it 0 at sum t t .
Now what we will do , elastic material will do ; elastic material , all the stress by strain curve will look like .
It will change , and then go back , and then of the strain will apply , the time when you apply the stress .
There will be a definite strength , this strain and stress are related by hooks law , will come back to that .
Now at the time , when this stress is released it will come back to the original state , and this stress and strain is related by hooks law , they are linear and is related by elastic modulus in between , as a proportionality constant .
Now what happen to a perfect .
So , this is a perfect elastic material , what happened to their perfect viscous material , how the strain will change every time .
Same stress is applied , same load is applied here , so with time , how the strain will change for a viscous material .
So , the time t 0 , it will start straining till load is present , or stress is present , it will continue deform , and the time the stress is removed , it will remained deformed permanently .
It does not come back to the original state , or end there is not any recovery at all , so this is a perfect viscous material .
And here stress is linked to the rate of change of strain with time , and the proportionality constant is the viscosity .
What happened to a polymeric material ; the visco plastic material , how does it happen , how does it respond with time .
It basically , let me show here strain .
So , at the time , you apply the state , it will strain to some extent , and then keep on continually forming , till the load is present .
And when the load is removed at t is equal to t , it will recover some part , and then stay somewhere , so it does not come back to the original so on .
So , this is a , basically example of visco elasticity .
So , if for a polymer , with temperature you can , see all this behavior .
Let us talk about a amorphous material ; the glassy state A to B is a perfect glasstic material , so if you apply stress strain , apply a stress it will strain , as long as stress is there , strain will be there , if you remove the stress the strain will become 0 , so that is the example of perfectly glassy material or elastic material .
So , this part glassy part will behave like a perfect elastic .
what about the leathery part , B to C .
When you apply the stress apply the load , it deform fast , and then as long as the stress is present it will continually deforming , and the movement this stress is removed , it will come back , the elastic component is recovered here , and then slowly recover some of the strain , but it will not come back to the 0 strain value , there will be a permanent deformation here , so this is example showing visco elasticity .
So , the fact that it is not coming back to the original state , it is showing some loss of energy , some viscous behavior , and part of it is actually getting recovered , which is the behavior of a elastic solid , so that is the reason , it is a example of the visco elastic behavior .
Similarly in case of rubber , a similar behavior , and in case of above very high temperature is like a polymer melt , it does not recover at all , and it continually gets deformed as long as stress is present , so you get a complete viscous behavior .
So , with temperature a polymer material can show different types of visco elasticity behavior from a perfect elastic to a perfect viscous behavior , within behavior of visco elasticity .
Similar thing can be shown in case of that strain rate , with higher strain rate , it will behave more elastic , and is very slow strain rate , it will be close to perfect viscous and intermediate strain rate , it will be , so visco elasticity .
Now , let us move to the other properties of polymeric materials , what we discuss , we just completed discussion of mechanical properties .
Now we will talk the other properties , and again we will not go into very detail description of these properties , and how it is evaluated .
We will just give brief introduction , brief description of those test .
Let us first talk about thermal properties , we discussed about the glass transition , and the glass transition and melting behavior of polymer earlier .
Thermal properties are basically the response of polymeric material , when the temperature increase or heat is supplied to the polymeric material .
Now besides the glass transition temperature and melting point , the other behavior polymer material can show is the heat distortion temperature , or has a softening temperature , and very high temperature , above of T m , when if you keep raising the temperature k if you keep raising the temperature , the polymer might decompose and gives decomposition temperature .
So , in a general , in case of semi crystalline thermo plastic material , you have ; first you have heat distortion temperature , the softening temperature .
Then you have glass transition temperature , then you have melting point or melting temperature , and then the degradation temperature or decomposition temperature .
For thermo sets , you do not have T g you have thermosets , you have HDT and T g , and then finally , the decomposition temperature .
We talked about the glass transition temperature , and melting point earlier .
So , we want to discuss about other thermal behavior , with of all the polymer behavior with temperature .
This is from a practical point of view ; this is the temperature where its starts softening , the polymer actually starts softening under some load .
So , heat deflection temperature is a temperature at which , the material flows shows significant amount of the deformation , under a constant load .
Now this significant amount , fix amount is basically is prefixed .
So , if you compare , you want to compare between materials , you can compare with the amount of deformation , same amount to deformation between the materials .
So , basically what is the test is done , that one polymer samples is specimen is taken , and one load is applied ; a definite load , constant load , and then temperature is slowly increased , at a given rate .
And at some temperature , this deformation happens , and that particular temperature is known as heat deflection temperature .
And like other HDT temperature will depend upon how fast you are heating up this material , how fast you changing the temperature , and obviously , the amount of load is present .
The higher is the load , lower will be the temperature , heat distinction temperature .
Now why it is important , let me you a example .
Now these are all amaphorous material ; polystyrene , poly polymethcalate , and polycarbon BPA polycarbonate , and Tgs are , approximate Tgs are listed here 100 145 .
So , looking at this material , if you say that , if you make some specimen or some product of the material , this materials will survive till around 100 degree centigrade , but that conclusion will be erratic , if we see this example , these are CD disc made from polycarbonate , and these are made from polyemethylene immaculate .
Now , these were subject to a , heating conditions for 96 hours at 180 degree centigrade and 95 degree erratic immunity .
Same thing here , but much lower , the picture is after much lower duration , at 80 degree centigrade .
Now 80 degree centigrade is actually below the Tg , well below the Tg of the PMMA sample , so you should expect , the polymer should survive .
But when you make a part its has its own load , it has some weight , so it has own load , and when you stack it this disk , basically the lower one will also have load from top .
So , at 80 degree itself it is deforming , which means it should not be used .
A disk cannot be made up of PMMA , will not survive a temperature of 80 degree centigrade .
So , this is what signifies , so if you want to make a disk and find the , which will be used for an application at higher temperature , you must know the HDT of that particular material .
HDT is typically as general rule of terms about Tg minus 20 degree centigrade .
So , Tg is not sufficient for practical point of view , you must know the softening temperature .
Now , if you increase the temperature of polymer , polymers typically degrade .
This is very important in processing point of view , because while processing the polymers , are subjected to very high temperature .
And as we have seen that T g plus sometime 150 centigrade at T m plus 50 degree centigrade or even more , and under shear , in case of processing with applying this melds and mixed to with , so does in case of molding , which mean that is undergoes polymer might degrade , and decompose of those conditions .
So , to find out , what is inherent thermal degradation behavior , the thermogravimetric analysis is done , which is in short called TGA .
Now T g is basically plot of white class of temperature , is just nothing but plot of weight or mass to utilize for this , the temperature .
Again the heating can be done at in air , or intent atmosphere , like the nitrogen gas or organ gas .
Obviously , in air the decomposition rate , and the decomposition will be a much lower temperature , compare with situation , where the heating is the temperature is increase under , nitrogen organ .
So , it is floated against temperature .
Now with , you can get this information from this test , basically we can know , at what temperature this polymer start decomposing or degrading , and we can basically find out the temperature at which 50 percent weight loss or complete weight loss , whatever is you interest .
A sometime small molecule comes out of the polymer , though we are heating , like is HCl from polyvinyl chloride H 2 O from amic acid .
So , if you can from the weight loss , we can get some idea about whether that this type of reaction is happening .
You can also do isothermal T g where weight loss is monitor , with time and constant temperature .
So , basically that will give us some idea , if we keep that polymer material at that particular temperature for long time , as especially in elevated temperature , where there is some degradation or decomposing happening or not .
And at higher temperature , polymers some time depolymerisation depolymerise , which might lead to some volatile monomers .
So , which we can get some idea about TGA , fragmentation happen during heating or as we have seen that some time additives are used during polymer formulation , so if they are , on heating if there is some loss , thermal loss of those additives , that can be also found out .
This is typical thermo gravimetric curve of different polymers , PVC PMA LDP PTFN PI in nitrogen , and these temperatures are corresponding on said temperature , and the 50 percent temperature , the temperature for example , for PMA this is the temperature correspondence to 50 percent weight loss .
Now the amount of mass is remaining after complete bonding , is what , is char , what is the char , means formation after heating , and that is very important when you talk about the flammability , and fame resistant behavior of the polymer .
So , in this case , basically it is showing that there is no char formation is taken place , basically entire polymer is de composed off , and as gone out .
If in this case for PVC , there is a significant amount of materials remaining , even after complete bonding .
So , there is some char formation as happened in case of PVC .
Obviously , it also depends on how fast you are heating .
So , the slower the heating , you will see the decomposition temperature , at lower temperature , where as higher heating will take to higher temperature , basically polymer cannot follow , the heating , if you are doing the heating in much faster rate , the polymer cannot follow the heating profile .
So , the effective temperature actually becomes slower , if you increase the heating rate .
So , if you want to compare between different polymers , the thermal stability at higher temperature you must compare , at same heating rate .
Now there are other like thermal behavior , thermal test basically done , is high cut softening temperature point .
It is the temperature at which a flatten , needle of one mille meter square cross section , under specific constant load is applied , and the temperature at which penetrates , the plastic specimen to a depth of one mille meter , it is known as high cut softening temperature .
Another important parameter , or thermal behavior is , the maximum use , or continues use temperature , or it sometime called relative thermal index .
It is the temperature , the highest constant temperature at which the material will survive , related to a application requirement , what does it mean .
It means that , you can use how long , and what is the service temperature , if you can make like that example I showed in the C D , what is the service temperature , that like means what is the maximum temperature , it can survive for long duration , at a for the particular applications .
If you want your C D material to survive for ten years , then you must specify what is the temperature ?
You can find out what is the maximum temperature it can be use .
So , you know like in hot countries , the temperature may go up to 45 50 degree centigrade .
So , if you want to survive , then your material , the maximum temperature at least should be 45 degree or 50 degree .
If we talking about a plastics , which I used in a car bonnet , then you know that on getting constant heat from outside , the bonnet temperature may go up to 80 degree 90 degree centigrade .
So , if you want to design one material , or test some material , which will survive the duration of cars life time about 20 years , or 15 years , then you should test that in advance .
So , this done in laboratory , in a escalated way , where basically the specimens are heated , in a elevated temperature , with some relative humidity , and with time the retention of properties are monitored , and then compared with an existing material , which is already in application , for long time .
So , if you compare , with material which is existing in that particular application for long time , and if you compare your material , test material , which is as good as that particular material , or even better that particular material in the escalated lab test , then you know that you material will survive that particular temperature , at least as good as the material , which is in the market .
Let us go through the next property , which is flammability , or flame and flame resistance properties of a polymer .
Now again this will be just briefed , we will have a brief discussion on this properties , and subsequent properties .
Basically when you , basically put fire on a polymeric material , it basically de polymerized to monomer , and it degrades to combustible gas , and in the presence of heat it basically have form flame and it burns .
So , that is the original flammability of polymer materials .
So , if you want to decrease the flammability , you basically have to remove this combustible gas , from the system , and basically has to reduce , when the heat formation , heat generation on bonding this polymeric materials .
How the testing is done .
In the lab the testing which is done is , call limiting oxygen index , it is most versatile small scale test .
It is defined as the minimum concentration oxygen , expressed as percentage by volume ; a volume percentage in short , in a mixture of oxygen and hydrogen that will sufficient , enough to support flaming combustion of a material .
Now , how many how long the flaming will happen , that has to be fixed for , comparing between materials , typically it is three minute bonding or flaming .
So , what is the experiment is done , oxygen and nitrogen are mixed , and basically starts with pure nitrogen , and oxygen is increased slowly , to find out that the minimum oxygen required in terms of volume percentage in this mixture , to sustain this flame for a specified time said for three minutes .
So , limiting oxygen index is basically , the volume of oxygen required , by the total volume into hundred that gives a percentage of material .
Now the other test also there , which have done in a real applications , where basically , which is been guided by U L laboratories .
And the rates the rate materials , in terms of different , this gives the different ratings like V 0 V 1 V 2 H B and those things .
In this case they keep this specify specified geometry of sample like , and this states , this states are very difficult to carry out repeatedly , and the only trained and certified person actually do test , for this a comparing material , or give the rating .
What happened you basically take the sample , and applied the flame , from a particular distance , and some cotton are placed .
These are cotton placed in the container below .
So , if it burns , and the while burning the sparks comes and ignite the cotton , which basically gives lower rating .
So , a sample , which burn from less time , and which also does not ignite the inflammable material like cotton , present in the bottom of the container , they actually gives the best ranking .
It basically try to mimic the applicable a actual application , when the polymers are , actually used in a application , what you want you want the polymers in case of a emergency , what do you want .
You do not want the polymer to burn , with a flame , and even if its burn , then it should not actually gives , or ignite the other material , other inflammable material in the .
It should not drip to the floor or some other inflammable or combustible material , so that the fire spreads .
Also important is that , it should not generate toxics smoke ; that is also important .
So , in case of fire resistance material , flame property it should not burn , if it burns , it should not drip and ignite other inflammable material , and third it should not generate toxics smokes .
So , these are the three criteria of a very good flame resistance polymer .
So , objective of flame integration , which to suppress , suppression of smoke , and toxic gas , it is actually is a known fact that , when something burns , it is a , if the causality or fertility of the people is mostly , because of the toxic gases , at first few minutes .
So , if you suppress the toxic gas generation , for first few minutes , then in case of emergency , people can go out of the situation , and survive .
Whereas if the toxic generates immediately after burning , then what happened , they cannot , they actually get ill immediately , and they cannot run away and find a safer place .
So , strategies to flame resistance is , to retard combustion process in differ phase , and char formation , causing char , if you have a polymer which forms high level of char , typically halogen containing polymers , and also inorganic polymers , and sometimes added additives , which does not , ceramic additives for example , which does not burn and just go out of the system .
They actually contribute to char conformation , and which actually suppress there , is basically prevent supply of this compostable gases , to this pyrolysis zone , and just by decreasing the met flammability .
We just go to the next set of the properties , where is basically expo .
What happened to the polymer getting exposed environmental situation ; for example , polymers will come across different chemicals , if you talking about a medical devices , doctors or medical persons , always apply some rectifies spirit , ethanol to disinfect , so your material has to survive , so that has to be chemical resistance of the chemical , medical professions are using .
It has to be , any outdoor materials , plastics material they come , every day come across the UV light , heat , outdoor heat , rain , and the bacterias and the viruses present in the material , so that is in oxygen of the environment .
So , basically that combine , we call that weatharability basically , when some polymer , or some plastic material is applied , we find weather ability .
Weatherability is basically combination all this effects ; like rain , air , heat , light , so combine all this we call of .
So , if a material or plastic which survives longer , in that outdoor condition , it is a weatharable material .
So , we test weather ability in the lab , in the accelerated chamber , which basically may make the outdoor condition , with control parameters , and we subject the experimental specimen in that condition , and after in a frequent interval , we basically test there mechanical , other properties like optical properties to find out where it is sustained in the particular , weather condition or not .
In case of chemical resistance we basically apply .
Say we actually immerse the test sample in that particular chemical agent , for that particular temperature , and for a particular specified time .
And after that we take out that material , and measure the mechanically property change , whether it survived or not .
We see , we visually inspect the material , whether any swelling has happened or in surface eroded or some cracking and crazing is happened .
And we also see whether the molecular rate of the material has changed , by the applying the coming in contact with chemical agent , which can be done by the measuring the viscosity of material .
So , what will do we stop here for this lecture , and we will talk about other properties like , optical property , and barrier property , and surface property in next lectures .
We will also talk briefly , that most often polymer are not used as such , they are basically used with other radiatives , which basically protect some of the , this polymers , this external agent we talk about , or this enhances the property , which can be used from outside .
So , we stop , and start with the rest of the property in the next lecture .
Welcome back this to this course on polymer chemistry , and this lecture we will continue our discussion on chain copolymerization , which we just studied in our last lecture .
In this lecture , we will talk about the importance of copolymerization , and then copolymer composition equation , and then go into different types of copolymerization process , and resulting different microstructure of copolymer , and then talk about composition drift , and monomer reactivities , and then corresponding the effect of chain initiation reaction on monomer reactivities .
Now in last lecture , we completed our discursion on ionic chain polymerization , and we also studied our discussion on chain copolymerization , and we talked about or we discussed different types of copolymerization ; namely we talked about statistical copolymer , alternate copolymers , and block copolymers , which could be different types of block co polymers , block , linear block trapped , and brass type of co polymers as well .
Now just to complete the types of co copolymerization we have discussed in the last lecture .
How do you write them in terms of nomenclature , if you make say copolymer with styrene and acylonitrile .
Now , if we do not want to specify the microstructure , whether it is a statistical copolymer , as alternate copolymer , block copolymer , then we can simply write poly styrene , and write co in between acylonitrile .
If you now that , this is a statistical copolymer , then instead of co you can write stat in between , and if you know that this statistical copolymers is a random copolymer , which we discussed in the last lecture , then we can write ran r a n in between .
If you know that this is a alternate copolymers , between any two monomers ; a poly A and poly B , then we can write it is a a l t alternate , as a alternate copolymer , and if you know it is a block polymer , if you want to write block polymer , then we can write poly A block poly B or poly A block poly B , both way we can write in this case , but only write different types of copolymers like statistical random on alternate copolymer , you should follow these type of nomenclature , we just mention .
So , a alternate copolymer between styrene co - acylonitrile you can write , you should write poly , in brackets styrene , hyphen a l t , hyphen acyolnitrile .
Now we were discussing about the importance of copolymerization , importance of copolymerization , why we should at all be interested in copolymers .
Now we said , that when we talk about homo polymers , now we can have only limited , number of homo polymers you know , we always using , if you have noticed same names basically coming , every time polystyrene , polyaclonoidal , polygon acetate , polymethyl like .
There are limited names we actually used for all the times , and commercially also if you want to , or the homo polymers which are used in large scale , they are very limited .
So , basically that limits our options to choose polymer for the particular applications .
Also if sometimes happens , in the most cases it happens ; that one single homopolymers do not posses , the required or the desired property we are looking for .
In that case to bring , to introduce that required property , we must mix this homo polymers with another homopolymer to get the properties , good properties of both the polymers , or we need to synthesis a new copolymer .
Now in terms of copolymers , that main advantage is that , the options are unlimited .
You can choose any of these monomers , which were utilized to make homopolymers , and then mix them , and also you can mix them in , or make copolymers in different proportion .
You can take styrene and M M A , and get numerous amount of copolymers , if you mixed , them in different proportion styrene is to M M A use can get 10 is to 90 , 90 is to 10 , 50 is to 50 , so you can get numerous number of copolymers , and also you can choose their different types of , the different sets of monomers .
So basically that tells you , that the number of options in copolymer , if number of co polymers can be synthesis is unlimited .
So if we require a definite property , or a property if you are looking for , for particular application then if that property is not available in a single homopolymer , then you can , from a prior knowledge of the properties of the homopolymers , you can actually synthesis copolymer of required proportion to get that property you want .
Now you can always argue , that why not just mix , and blend the homopolymers .
Take poly A , which is homopolymer , and mix poly B , which is another homopolymer .
Unless you .
Here also you can actually get numerous numbers of composition , by choosing different A and B , and mixing them in different define ratio , but you know most cases , you cannot make two polymers , to homo polymers .
In case of polymers to homopolymers are .
In most cases they do not make miscible blends , and as a results , the property of the mixture , of polymer A and polymer B , thus not give you the required property we are looking for .
Actually it gives you worst property , then the individual homopolymers , unless you have a mechanism to , comfortablize , or misapplies , or have some sort of interaction between the two homopolymers .
And to do that actually you need copolymers , co polymers of .
In this case if you poly A , and a block poly B , then you can actually used these copolymer , block copolymer as a comfortabalizer , between poly A and poly B , and by doing this you can actually improve the property of the blend , of poly A and poly B .
So what does mean that not only , a require co polymers for improved teramid properties .
Teramid properties in a single polymer , but you can utilized this type of block polymer to comprise to homopolymer and next , and make numerous number of blend composition , but in this chain polymers , we will be discussing the chain co polymer , which where we you had mixing a monomer a , and monomer b , from beginning and making copolymers .
We will not discuss this is not a part of this chain copolymerization , where you have make a monomer a , which you polymerized , by living polymerized method , poly A , and then add a second monomer to make poly A and poly B .
This is the most common way making block copolymer , but we will not discuss this technique of synthesizing block copolymer in this section .
We will be mainly , or exclusively discussing the copolymers , where you start with a mixture of two monomer , and then synthesis the copolymer .
And in this case as we see that , most cases making block copolymer by this method is difficult , so that is why the reason why , is almost cases , this is the processes applied to make block copolymer .
So we will discuss this process in coming pages .
Now continuing with the importance of copolymer for example , if a polystyrene homopolymers , polystyrene homo polymerization is a brittle polymerization , brakes down easily , and also it has poor solvent or chemical resistance .
So to improve of this property of polystyrene , you can actually make a copolymer of polystyrene acrylonitrile , and this actually improves the chemical resistance property of , chemical resistance of over styrene homopolymers .
Now this does not improve the brittleness , of the impact properties of polystyrene too much .
So , what is done industrially , you make a rubbery , rubberic code , so you make a rubberic code of poly butadiene .
See by emulsion method , you make core , you make take a butadiene , and polymerize in by emulsion method to make a butadiene code , and some of the double bound which has remain unreacted .
You can utilize those double bound , and make this copolymers of polystyrene and acrylonitrile , these are the copolymers of polystyrene and acylonitrile P s co A N , this is polystyrene co acylonitrile .
So , basically you can use these as such , or you add blend this two another homopolymer , and because the presents of this rubberic code , which is soft , this actually improves the impact property , because this is the soft impact , it has observe the impacts , and actually makes the polymer material , less brittle compare to either polystyrene , or a ecopolymera polystyrene , and acrynitriles , so these are my example .
This the one example , where you can see that copolymerization techniques are used to improve the properties of polystyrene , by copolymerization with other copolymer , if you have three co monomers basically we use the term third polymer , for the co polymers which are produced in this a a from this three monomers .
Now , will talk about copolymer form position , now in most cases what happened , because we are mixing M 1 and M 2 , and you are copolymerizing form there .
Most cases this M 1 and M 2 m will have difference in reactivity , and results what happened one of the monomers get incorporated in the growing copolymer , much faster rate compared to the other .
For example M 1 is more reactive compare to the M 2 , then in the propagating copolymer chain M 1 will get incorporated , faster rate , in faster rate than in two polymers .
So , as a result what will have if you start each side 50 50 ratio of M 1 and M 2 , you will get eco polymer at the beginning .
At the beginning you will get a copolymer , which will have M 1 greater than 50 percent , and M 2 less than 50 percent , this is in the copolymer , at the beginning .
So , because M 1 is more reactivity , you will get in the chain much faster , so you will get eco polymer , which reach in M 1 compare to M 2 .
So you will have a difference in , the monomers concentration in the copolymer , compared to feed .
Now as reaction goes with more and more M 1 is getting incorporated , now first a rate then M 2 .
Soon the reaction medium will have less M 1 , because most M 1 monomer then M 2 , because most of the M 1 has get you know , as incorporate , got incorporated in the copolymer chain , so feed monomer concentrations , of M 1 will lower than beginning .
As a result the monomer composition in the medium , in the reaction medium , will be different than the beginning .
So , now the copolymers which will forms at the later part of your polymerization copolymerization , because the monomer composition in this case , the ratio of M 1 M 2 or different from beginning numbers .
The copolymers which will form , which will have different monomer content , then the copolymers which form in the beginning or at the beginning .
So what we will have , we will have a composition drift , which means the copolymers which form at the beginning they will have different composition , than the copolymers which are forming at the later part of the copolymerization reaction , so is have so you can understand that the monomer content in the copolymers will be different , then the feed ratio at the beginning , and with time the monomer composition will be different , from the beginning , and there will be composition drift .
So these things will be offering during your copolymerization reaction .
To predict the monomer or the composition of the copolymer , you can look at the polymerization rate of the individual homopolymers , likes for example if you .
You can look at the homopolymerization rate of M 1 and M 2 , and from that you can have idea about the homopolymerization , but the homopolymerization data , homopolymerization rate data , actually has very little significance or resiblance with the rate of consumption , or rate of reaction of a monomer during a copolymerization reaction , which means that , if a monomer , the rate at which a monomer ; say M 1 undergo homopolymerization , that could be quite different , when you have M 2 in the reaction medium .
For example , if I take say consider maleic anhydride , we talked about that maleic anhydride or say stilbene .
We talked about in these molecules during our discussion on radical polymerization .
Now these monomers , actually do not undergo homopolymerization by itself , we discussed about that , and the reason for that , but they can undergo copolymerization , in fissile by , with other monomers like styrene ethynemethyne and… So , if you have the data , reaction rate data from the homopolymers ; that is not useful when you predict the composition or the reaction rate , when this monomers are reacting with the second co monomers to form a copolymerization .
Take another example where if you consider as a vinyl acetate .
Now vinyl acetate , obviously undergo very fissile homopolymerization , but when you have a styrene as a second monomer .
What happened , homopolymerization become very low , as long as styrene is present , because the copolymerization rate of vinyl acetate with styrene , it is much faster than the homopolymerization .
So as long as styrene is present , vinyl acetate will only form copolymer , and after styrene is over , consume from the reaction medium , then only it actually form homopolymerization .
So from here , also if you look at the homopolymer data of vinyl acetate , and then try to utilize these data to have a idea about the copolymer composition , and the reaction rate between the vinyl acetate and the styrene , that we will be of , very little significance for these copolymerization .
So , basically these homopolymer data rate for this .
These individual monomers are not very useful , when we discuss or copolymerization reaction .
So we need to predict , in order to predict the copolymerization composition , what we need to do , we need to construct a kinetic model and the simplest is the terminal model .
We will talk about the simplest model , which is known as terminal model .
Now what it says , it says that , the reactivity of a propagating species , only depend on the monomer with unit which is present at the growing chain end .
The chemical re reactivity of the propagating chain in a copolymerization , only depends on the monomer unit present at the end of the growing chain , which means that the chemical reactivity of these propagating chain , will only depend upon the reactivity of the M 1 group .
Now star could be radical , cations or anion , so this is valid , this terminal model is valid for any initiation process .
To elaborate this if we have say , this two or this two , because in all this cases the terminal group , or the monomer unit which is present at the growing in a same , all these will have same chemical reactivity for propagation reaction , so this is the assumption we are making in the terminal model .
So what are the four possible propagation reactions possible in , during this copolymerization , lets around right those .
So M 1 , star can react with M 1 , M 1 and M 2 are two monomers , produced M 1 , M 1 star can react with M 2 , M 2 to star can react with , M 1 react with .
Now this reactions in one and four , where M 1 is reacting with M 1 , and M 2 is reacting with M 2 from the same , see same propagating species , these are called homo propagation or self propagation , and these two , where M 1 in which is reacting with M 2 forming M 2 , these are cross propagation reaction these are , these two are cross propagation , and one and four are homo or self propagation reaction .
Now what is the rate of reaction , or rate at which M 1 is getting incorporated in the copolymer chain .
This step one and step three are where M 1 is getting consumed , and getting incorporated in the chain ; see we will write K 1 1 M 1 star M 1 plus K 2 1 M 2 star M 1 , and 1 2 plus K 2 2 into star into .
Now how do .
Look at these rate constants , basically the first number represents the radical , sorry the propagating species , where the radical cation or anion it does not matter , so this is first one is from the propagating reacting species , and the second one is for the monomer .
So one in the second means M 1 , two is the second means M 2 and so on .
Now at any instance , the rate at which M 1 and M 2 is getting incorporated , in the copolymer chain , which will be given by the rate at which , this M 1 and M 2 is getting consumed .
So the molar ratio of M 1 and M 2 , in the copolymer at any instance , is given by d M 1 , because this is the rate at which , they are getting consumed , during the reaction .
So you can write the rest of the things from the two expressions , we got in the last one .
Now we can apply the study state , where the rate of change of M 1 star is zero ; like we discussed in the case of our chain polymerization , at the steady state the concentration of M 1 and M 2 star remains constant , so rate of change is actually zero at steady state .
Now the steps which M 1 is , M 1 star is getting consumed , for in the reaction one , where 1 M 1 star is consuming , getting consumed , and 1 M 1 star is forming , so they are not changing the concentration on M 1 star .
In the fourth reaction 1 into star is getting consumed , and 1 into star is getting produced , so they also do not change , this reaction also do not change the concentration of M 2 star .
So these are the two reaction where in this case ; M 1 is getting M 1 star is getting consumed in M 2 star forming , and in this case M 2 star is getting consumed , and M 1 star is forming .
So we can write down the expressions for M 1 star and M 2 star , is minus K 1 2 , you can do from the expression in the last page , plus K 1 2 , and in case of M 2 this is a step ; step two where M 2 is getting into ties getting produced , and in the step three , where M 2 star is getting consumed .
These are basically two same reactions , so from here we can write K 1 2 M 1 star M 1 .
Now , here defining two more term R 1 , which is K 1 1 by K 1 2 , and R 2 K 2 2 by K 2 1 , and if we apply these conditions , steady state condition and use this two expression , then we can write the composition of the two monomers , in the copolymer as this .
Now this expression , which gives the molar ratio of M 1 and M 2 in the copolymer form that any instance , when the monomer concentration in the reaction medium , is M 1 for M 1 , and M 2 for M 2 monomer .
So this is the molar ratio of monomer M 1 and M 2 , in the copolymer , any instance where the corresponding concentration of free monomer , in the reaction medium , given by this M 1 and this M 2 .
Now it is easy to express the concentrations in terms of molar ratio , where F 1 is the molar ratio of pre monomer in the reaction medium , so we can write , this as M 1 M 1 plus M 2 .
And if we write F 1 , is the molar ratio , or mole fraction .
This is the mole fraction of M 1 in 3 M 1 in the reaction medium , and this is the mole fraction of M 1 in the copolymer , so we can write the d M 1 plus the d M 2 , 1 minus F 2 .
So , you can simply write F 1 is R 1 F 1 , plus F 1 F 2 or F 1 by F 2 is .
One more time F 1 is the mole fraction of the pre monomer in the reaction medium , and F 1 , capital f of upper case , is the mole fraction of M 1 , in the copolymer .
Now this expression has been verified for innumerable copolymer systems , and they are , this expression is equally applicable to cationic and anionic and radical copolymerization .
And it is not dependent on the reaction initiation system you are following .
Now , these fellow R 1 and R 2 , they are almost independent of the reaction medium , or reaction conditions for radical polymerization , but the values of R 1 and R 2 could be quite different , when you talk about different initiation system , and we will talk about giving a specific example in few minutes .
Now , let us talk about this monomer .
In case of radical it has said that at several combination of monomer possible , because we know that most of the monomers we have seen during our discussion , initial discussion in chain polymerization that , most of the vinyl monomers , they do undergo radical polymerization .
So hence lot of monomers can be utilized or , can be make utilized to copolymer by radical mechanism .
Whereas ionic polymers ; in case of anionic polymers mono monomers selective , it is not every state of two monomers can be utilized for , making ionic copolymerization .
They are very selective ; for example if I take a specific example of styrene and acrylonitride .
Now this can be copolymerized by radical , it can be copolymerized by anionic , but it cannot be copolymerized by cationic .
Whereas if I takes styrene and vinylether , again it can be polymerized by radical , but it cannot be polymerized , because this is , cannot be polymerized by anionic , in this case , it is cannot be polymerized by cationic , but it can be polymerized by cationic polymerization .
So it is said that , you can basically choose any two co monomers , which in most cases can polymerized radically , but if you want to use any of this cationic or anionic technique then the number of pairs of co monomers you can choose are limited , as we discussed in during our chain polymerization discussion .
Now , lets us discuss more about R 1 and R 2 ; as we define R 1 given by K 1 1 by K 1 2 , and R 2 is given by K 2 2 and K 2 1 .
Now this is basically the rate at which , this is R 1 , this is the ratio of homo propagation and cross prosperous .
This is the homo propagation and this is a cross propagation , and this is also a , this is homo propagation and this is pros propagation .
So basically R 1 and R 2 , this is reactivity , monomer reactivity ratio , are the ratios of corresponding homo propagation and cross propagation .
Now R 1 is greater than 1 , then the tendency for homo propagation is more compared to pros propagation , which means that tendency for homopolymer is more than formation of copolymerization , if R 1 is zero , which means there is no tendency of homopolymerization , it is only , it can only undergo copolymerization .
If R 1 is 1 , then both are equal ; that means there is no preference were homo propagation and copolymerization , so it completely random copolymer is formed , and if R is less than 1 then the tendency to the co - polymerise , is more than the tendency to homopolymerized .
Now in the expression of R 1 and R 2 , we do not have any rate constant for the termination and initiation reactions , which means that if we talk about that expression .
If we talk about this expression , here we do not have any rate constant coming or appearing from initiation reaction , termination reaction and so forth the from the chain transfer reaction as well the , which mean that the rate of initiation or termination or say inivation or chain terminate transfer reactions , do not have any significant on contribution , do not affect the two copolymer composition at all .
So basically if you talk about different radical mechanism ; for example if you talk about , radical initiation by thermal initiation , or a photochemical initiation , or say redox reaction in initiation .
In all those cases as long as your M 1 and M 2 are same , the composition in the copolymer would be same , irrespective of the initiation mechanizing you have applied , and also it does not depends upon whether there is presence or absence of chain transfer reactions in the medium or not , but as I said that if the mode of initiation , like whether its anionic cationic or radical , that change , then obviously the composition of the two monomers in the co polymers will change .
And as you can understand that the , polarity of the solvent in which you are doing the reaction , and that will effect more when you have a ionic chain co polymerization , compare to when you have a radical chain co polymerization .
Now let us talk about different types of co polymerization , and corresponding chain micro structures ; types of co polymerization and corresponding chain micro structure .
Now , let us talk about the first case , where we talked about ideal co polymerization .
In this case , R 1 multiplied by R 2 is 1 or R 2 is 1 by R 1 , we can write k 2 2 by K 2 1 K 1 2 K 1 1 .
Now , this gives you the reaction with , the ratio , or the relative reaction of M 2 dot M 2 star , with M 1 , M 2 and M 1 , and this keeps M 1 .
Now , if i consider this value as two , let us consider this value , which means that M 2 star will react twice as faster with M 2 , compare to M 1 , so does M 1 star , M 1 star also will react with M 2 , twice as fast at it reacts with M 1 .
So , respective of which propagating species you have in the reaction medium , it is always the reaction with M 2 will be faster , and M 2 will more reactive than M 1 .
Or other sense , M 2 , if you talk about reverse way , M 2 will be more reactive , towards both m star and M 1 star , which means that the rate , relative rates at which , two monomers incorporative in the co polymer chains , are the same , irrespective of the identity , of the unit , which is present at the end of propagating species .
So , relative rates at which M 2 and M 1 is getting incorporated in the chain , copolymer chain is independent of which is present at the end , and the addition of , or incorporation M 2 in the copolymer chain is unbiased ; that means , whether M 2 will get added next M 2 star , or M 1 star , are statistically same .
So , they will , the sequence distribution of this case of the repeat unit in this copolymers is random , so you will get .
You will make this the copolymer at the beginning , you will get more numbers M 2 is getting incorporated in the polymer copolymer chain , but the M 2 , addition of M 2 M 1 will be complete random .
There will be no biasness of M 1 sitting next to M 2 , or M 1 seating next to M 1 .
So , which we have random distribution of , or sequence of the copolymer , and also M 2 ; this is a , M 2 is , or F 2 in this case , F 2 is higher than F 1 , if R 2 is higher than R 1 .
Now , we can simply write R 1 , and R 2 is 1 , and used as in this expression , this expression , and we can right F 1 R 1 F 1 and R 1 F 1 plus F 2 .
Now a special case , where R 1 and R 2 is 1 , what happen again .
In this case as we discussed earlier that , tendency to homo propagate , and tendency to cross propagate is same , so what happen .
Again M 1 and M 2 will get in incorporated randomly in the copolymer chain , and F 1 would be same as F 1 , and F 2 would be same as F 2 , because the reactivities , the monomer reactive ratio of this two are same , and they are one .
So , obviously , the rate at which M 1 and M 2 getting incorporated in a co polymer chain , are same as their ratio in the monomer field .
So , if I want to plot ; say F 1 versus F 1 ; that is the , 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 , this is correspondence to the 20 percent composition of monomer aim in the , free monomer in the reactions mixture .
Whereas this correspondence to , the 80 percent of free monomer M 1 in the reaction mixture , while this is correspondence to 80 percent of the monomer aim in the co polymer .
Now when R 1 and R 2 is R 1 is R 2 is 1 .
Now , whatever the composition in the feed ; that is also in the copolymer you have ; this is a the 0.1 , this a 0.5 , this is a 2 , and this is 10 , r is 0.1 , R is 0.2 and 10 R 1 .
So , in this case , because the reactivity of monomer m is lower , they get incorporated much lower rate , than monomer m 2 , where if the higher rate , reaction reactivity of M 1 is higher compare to reactivity of m 2 , that M 1 and incorporated in much faster rate compared to in m 2 .
Now this cross a similar to the vapor liquid equilibrium of ideal liquid mixtures , so that is why , that is from where this name of ideal has come .
Now next we will talk about , the second case .
This was we discussed case number a , and next talk about case number b , where we have R 1 and R 2 is 0 , so either we can R 1 and R 2 is both are zero .
In this case , you can , R 1 is as we said K 1 by K 2 by , and R 2 is K 2 2 by k 2 1 , obviously in both the monomer M 1 M 2 , there is no tendency to homopolimerise , so they there will only form copolymer .
So , M 1 will only react with M 2 star , and M 2 only react with M 1 star , only the cross propagation happen , which means you have copolymer of this type .
M 1 star will only react with M 2 , and m 2 star will only react with M 1 and so on , so you have a perfectively alternate copolymer , just alternate arrangement of the monomers , and F 1 and F 2 both will be fifty percent in this case .
So , as long as there is 1 monomer is left in the reaction continue , and once 1 of the monomer get consumed , the reaction will stopped there , because the second monomer even if that is present in the reaction medium , that cannot participate in the homopolymerisation , so reaction is not proceed further .
So , if you plot F 1 verses F 2 , no matter what is the concentration of F 1 , you always get fifty percent incorporation in the copolymerstion , this can be achieved , also if 1 of the monomer is , R 1 is zero , reactivity is zero , it could be rather way on , R 2 is , 1 is 0 .
If R 1 , or it could be R 1 and R 2 both are near to zero .
So in this case what happened it do not get a perfect alternate , if for example if I take the case of R 1 , greater than zero and R 2 zero , then M 2 star only can react with M 1 star .
Whereas M 1 star can react with M 1 star in some extent , so what will happen , you will get a something like this .
In most cases , it will be alternating , but there will be some cases , there will be two M 1 and three M 1 sitting next to next each other .
So , it is essentially alternate copolymer with some random incorporation of , or statistically incorporation of M 1 , because in that case , where some tendency to homo polymer , M 1 , because R 1 is higher than zero ; that is not exclusively participate in cross propagation , this sometime can participating homopolymers , homopropogation , so you will get essentially a alternate copolymer , but some cases will , some incorporation of M 1 .
Now there is a third case , where R 1 and R 2 not equal to zero or not equals to 1 .
Now , you can have situations like R 1 greater than 1 , R 2 less than 1 or vice versa , or R 1 less than 1 or closer than 1 , R 1 greater than 1 , R 2 greater than 1 .
These are three possibilities , this is not happened very practically , but these two are very common in practice .
So , what will they do in next lecture , we will start form this case , and talk about types of copolymer it forms , and the microstructure of that resulting copolymers , and also talk about composition drift in this copolymerstion medium and copolymerstion reaction , and also talk about the reactivity .
No , how the value of the R 1 and R 2 which is sincerely the monomer reactivity ratios , how they vary with the reaction parameters , and the monomer structure , what is the structure of monomer structure in the reactivity of the monomer reactivity ratios .
To with this , we just stop into this lecture , so we will come back , and continue this discussion on chain copolymerization in next lecture .
Welcome back to this portion of polymer chemistry and into this 19th lecture , I am going to cover rest of the discussion on anionic chain polymerization , and then I will start our discussion on chain copolymerization .
In this lecture , we will try to cover anionic chain polymerization , which we started in the last lecture and will complete our discussion on termination reactions and then touch upon the kinetics of anionic chain polymerization and also the molecular weight in this type of polymerization .
And then talk about briefly about the practical aspects of anionic chain polymerization and then we will start this chain copolymerization , which I will continue in the next lecture as well .
Now , let us recap the lecture we had in the last time lecture 18 , where we talked about the cationic chain polymerization of kinetic and energetics and we started our discussion on anionic chain polymerization and we talked about general features of ionic chain , anionic chain polymerization and different types of propagation , initiation , mechanisms , propagation and we just studied a few examples by which anionic chain polymerization can be terminated .
Now , let us go back and just look at the initiation process once again .
In anionic polymerization , we , we had discussed two types , mainly two types of initiator , one was organo - metallic compounds and another was electron transfer through electron transfer reaction .
Now , recollect from our discussion from last time , that we had .
This had given example of butyl lithium , which is the very strong electrophile .
So , the monomers , which does not propagate , which the monomers do not propagate with the very highly strongly stabilized anion , we required this , this strongly nucluophilic anion and this can be utilized to initiate anionic polymerization of styrene , isoprene .
And initiator like this , which are medium nucleiophic , they can be utilized to initiate monomers like .
And this type of initiators , which are weakly , very weak nucleophiles , they can be utilized to initiate a very strongly or highly stabilized propagating anions , like cyanoacylate , acylate , because cyanoacylate has two stabilizing groups .
This has this , the propagating anion from cyanoacylate is highly stabilized , so you can actually anionically polymerize these cyanoacylate monomers with a weekly , very weak nucleophiles .
So , you can also polymerize with strong nucleophiles as well , but this type of monomers can be polymerized anionically by weak , very weak nucleophiles .
Now , we talked about this electron transfer initiation by , for example , gave this sodium and naphthalene and we talked about propagation step and how propagation step depends on the solvent polarity .
And we started our discussion on termination reaction for anionic polymerization .
Now , you can recollect from our discussion , that its anionic polymerization , you have no bimolecular termination and in fact , in absence of any side reaction , if you have taken care of the condition , reaction condition in such a way , that no impurities are present and you have taken care of all the other purity aspects , then most of this anionic polymerization , actually , actually propagate without termination .
So , this anionic polymerization mainly happen without termination , as long as termination , as long you has have inert atmosphere and extremely clean glassware analyzing skills .
Things like O 2 , CO 2 , they actually inhibit the anionic chain polymerization by forming a peroxyl , peroxyl or carboxyl anion , which are very weak nucleophile , which cannot reinitiate a new anionic chain , so these are inhibitors .
So , extreme care should be taken to remove this O 2 , CO 2 type impurities .
Now , you can deliberately , in most cases laboratory , we do terminate a propagating anion by adding some external reagent .
For example , if we add a polystyrene anion , we can add water and this chain gets terminated and you get OH minus , which is , this is a very weakly nucleophile , so it cannot further initiate anionic chain .
So , reaction actually gets terminated in these steps .
Now , utilizing this concept you can actually synthesize functionalized polymers , which are also called telechelic polymers , which we discussed in the last class .
For example , if you terminate , say I write a general expression , expression for a vinyl polymer and we terminate by carbon dioxide and then acidify the reaction medium , you get carboxylic acid .
You do the same thing , say , with ethylene oxide and then acidify , you get alcohol .
Now , you can even functionalize this by such reagent and here you can make a polymer with a functional group at the end , so it can be utilized .
This polymer , which is also known as macromonomer because it can act as a monomer and start polymerization once more time physically with micromolecules behaving like monomers , so we often call this as a macromonomer .
So , you can create in this way macromonomer , which you can utilize for further polymerization .
Now , you can synthesize telechelic polymers by taking an initiator , which is already functional group .
For example , if I take a tri methyl silyl protected .
Now , you can initiate a polymer chain and at the end you can terminate the chain and then by acid hydrolysis you can make a interminated polymer .
So , using this termination reaction , with a definite reagent you can actually create , you can terminate and as well , you can create the functional group at the end of the polymers , polymer chain , which is very useful and which can be utilized for several other applications .
You can take help of couplic reaction and you can make four arm in case , say , four arm star polymer .
So , these are the examples by which you know , these are examples how you can utilize the anionic polymers and can make , functionalize and the , and polymers of having different geometallic mineral .
You make , as we have discussed several times in last lecture , that you can utilize this end and if you have , add a next second monomer , you actually make block copolymer as well .
See , if you can , if you take this type of chain and you add second monomer B , then you can make a block copolymer .
Now , in anionic polymerization , this , lot of side reactions can happen by which , by which the polymer chain can get terminated .
And especially , if added for polar monomers , for example if I take an acrylate , and let us consider a propagating chain and it can actually abstract hydrogen .
And can , this chain can get terminated and you can form , this can now reinitiate the polymers by which it can form branches .
So , this one chain terminates , gets terminated by this side reaction and you can form branch in other growing chain .
Now , that is not applicable for monomers like methacrylates where this hydrogen is absent , but methacrylates actually can participate in several side reactions .
For example , if I write this , say , place an example of methyl methacrylate , this is the chain end where you have a .
Now , it can actually form a cycle and it can knock out this methoxy and terminate this chain .
So , I can write now , this is a dead chain , so the chain gets terminated and this is a weak nucleophile , as we discussed earlier .
So , it actually often cannot reinitiate anionic polymerization and even it does , it actually slowed down the reaction a significant way .
Now , another side reaction , which is very possible , very prominent in case of methyl methacrylate is as follows , is actually reaction on the monomer , not on the polymer .
This is reaction monomer with the initiator molecule itself .
Now , it can do a substitution reaction here , substitution nucleophilic reaction here and form again a methoxy group here .
Now , this , this is the different monomer all together compared to the original methyl methacrylate monomer .
So , basically , now if the polymer start , it is actually the copolymer of methyl methacrylate and this , this monomer and also , not only it makes a copolymer , the reaction also gets significantly slowed down again because of the weak nucleophicity of this anion , generated anion .
Now , if the reaction is slow , slowed down , then the dispersity problems comes , you know the polymer has become much broader and the heaviness becomes difficult to maintain , so there strategies , which are utilized to minimize this side reactions is especially for the polar monomers .
We discussed for examples , for example like for methacrylates .
Now , if to slow down this reaction one strategy is used very often is to make a bulk .
You take a bulky anion initiator , so that spherically , this reaction , this substitution reaction becomes problematic .
So , this , this reaction , this side reaction becomes difficult .
For example , instead of taking butyl lithium , this is taking buthyl lithium , if you take a bulky lithium group like 1 , diphenyl hexyl lithium or say , cumyl lithium .
Now , in this case , because this groups , this R group in this case are very larger in size , this S , this side reaction of substitution nucleophilic reactions becomes slow down difficult , so you can actually suppress this side reaction .
If you think about the side reaction , that intra - molecular cyclization reaction , which is discussed here and now fortunately , the activation energy for this reaction , activation for only for this reaction is higher compared to the normal propagation reaction .
So , you can take advantage of that difference in activation energy and you can decrease the temperature .
Now , if you decrease the temperature both , the normal propagation and this inter - molecular circulation slow down , decreases .
But because activation energy for this cyclic reaction is higher , so the drop in the rate of this cyclic reaction is much much higher compared to the normal propagation reaction .
So , in that way you can actually minimize this side reaction .
And another way to minimize this sort of size reaction is to use little polar molecular , polar solvent like THF .
In that case you get solvent separated anions , initiator molecules .
So , you can actually combine these three strategies , like using polar molecular , polymer solvent like THF , THF and do reaction in much lower temperature , say like at minus 78 degree centigrade and use bulky initiator .
So , by using these three strategies you can actually minimize this side reaction from methyl methacrylate and carry out addition anionic polymerization for methyl methacrylate and this similar sort of strategy can be applied for other polar monomers as well .
Now , as we have been talking , that this anionic polymerization proceeds without termination , but that does not mean , that this anionic chain ends , leave forever , not there are some intrinsic self - termination steps possible , which are actually very slow and extremely slow .
So , in normal time frame you can call those reactions absent , but during a longer time frame those reaction could be significant and then by that process , that termination , the chain could be terminated .
For example , if we take this electron transfer for initiation reaction of styrene .
Now , you have seen , now it can undergo hydride elimination and form an ionic end .
Now this actually can , this is a very acidic proton , so it can be easily abstracted by an anion , which could be another chain end , the styrile chain end .
So , this proton can be abstracted by another propagating chain end and form.. ... Now , this is unreactive molecule , so this is one example by which , that polystyrile anion is self - terminating and finally ending into unreactive or terminated polymer chain , but these reactions are very slow .
As you can see , hydride elimination is always slow and if you compare with a cationic polymerization we talked about , in that case it was actually proton elimination , which was much , comparably much easier things to happen .
So , in comparison to cationic polymerization and anionic polymerization , anionic polymerization , anionic chain ends are much more stable compared to a cationic chain end .
So , anionic , in anionic chain polymerization you actually consider , that this polymerization happen without any practical termination steps .
Now , let us talk about this kinetics of anionic polymerization Now , before we go in details , lets us recap what we learned in anionic polymerization , so that our kinetic understanding will become easier .
Now , we know that in case of anionic polymerization the initiation is faster .
Now , remember the discussion we had for radical , this polymerization , radical chain polymerization , where the initiation steps is much slower compared to propagation step , but in this case , this anionic polymerization , the initiation steps are much much faster compared to propagation steps .
So , each initiator generates and also , each initiator , if you are talking about organic butane lithium or say , sodium and naphthalene electron transfer reaction , each initiator molecules actually generates single carbanionic center , active center .
So , basically number of moles of initiator is basically , will produce same number of moles of polymers at the end of the reaction .
So , chains are initiated all at once because initiation steps are much faster .
All the chains are initiated , all the chains are initiated at a go , so this all starts together and all the initiator actually gets consumed before propagation reaction actually starts .
And as you can now visualize , that all the chains , now after initiation is complete all the chains will grow simultaneously under identical condition .
And unless we have impurities , all we want to stop or terminate the reaction by adding some agent , they , there is no termination reaction .
Actually , there is no or very little de - polymerization reaction depending on of sling temperature of the polymer as well .
So , what , so we can write , that k i is much higher than k p , rate constant for the polymerization and rate of polymerization , which is again the standard way of writing k p .
And again it is a , as we can remember the discussion for radical polymerization , we can write if there is bimolecular reaction between a monomer and a carbanionic chain end .
So , we can write monomer concentration and the concentration of all the anionic , which is present in the reaction medium .
So , what is M minus ?
The concentration of all the anionic species , which is present in the reaction .
It is same , it is same as the initiator concentration because as we discussed , that each initiator actually initiates one chain , so the concentration of the anions would be same as the concentration of the initiator molecules .
Now , this expression is satisfactory for , for homogenous and reactions in polar medium .
In non - polar medium what happens ?
There is a possibility that the initiator molecules can aggregate .
For example , if you take a butyl lithium in non - polar medium , you can actually aggregate , and , and that depends on which butyl lithium group you are taking and number vary from 4 to 6 or something .
So , what , what is to do ?
Remember , that if , if you take a very non - polar medium or hydrocarbon medium , then this initiator molecules can actually aggregate effectively reducing the concentration of the available initiator , which means this you have to compensate or you have to take care of that correction in the concentration of initiator term to actually get the rate of polymerization .
And as you can , you can visualize or you can explain that because there is no termination reaction and the generation of initiator or the initiation is much faster , the concentration of this anion , anionic species are much higher than a radical polymerization .
For example , concentration of anionic species is almost like 10 to the power of 5 times higher than M dot in a radical chain polymerization , which makes R p for anionic is much higher than R p for radical and that is why this anionic reactions get over in very short time , even in few seconds .
Sometimes the reaction is so faster , that in a fraction of seconds this polymerization is completed .
Now , what is the effect of solvent ?
We have discussed earlier , that the solvent plays a very important role in , in terms of rate of polymerization of this ionic polymerization , especially in case of anionic polymerization .
Now , let us , we know , that at different state of aggregation we have discussed earlier , that this ion - pairs present in different state of aggregation forms a tight ion - pair to solvent separated ion - pair to completely free ion - pair .
They could exist depending upon the polarity of the medium .
They can exist in different state of aggregation and that state , that state of aggregation will be , will definitely determine the reactivity of the anionic groups at the same end .
If this is , this is the ion - pairs are totally separated , they are free ion - pairs .
Obviously , the reactivity of the ions , end ions are higher , so the R p will be higher compared to if the ion - pairs are in contact , or will be tight in case of , if you have considered same solvent , same say , non - polar solvent .
The cationic , in case of cationic polymerization , the ions are not as tight as in case of anionic polymerization because the size of the counter ions , like lithium , butyl lithium case or some , they are small , so the anions and the canions , cation in case of anionic polymerization are much more tight .
So , for a given solvent , especially non , non - polar solvent , the rate of cationic polymerization is higher compared to anionic polymerization , is about 2 to 3 times higher and because in case of anions , anionic polymerization , they are in non - polar medium , they are tight .
So , effect of solvent polarity , if we increase the polarity , for polarity for both cases , cationic and anionic , the effect in case of anionic polymerization is much higher because to begin with , they are much tight and if you increase the polarity , they can be free .
So , the reactivity goes up and if we talk about the effect of counter ion , so let us consider first the polar solvent .
If you consider polar solvent , that means , the ions are either solvent separated or they are free anion and in that case , the salvation , the separation ion , separation is , is , is more feasible for a small ion like lithium , a small cation for lithium because lithium will be much more solvated in a polar solvent compared to a larger size ion , cation , like cesium cation or a potassium cation .
So , if you are talking about a polar solvent , then small counter ion , counter cation will help in separating those ion - pairs and hence the reaction will be to go up and in the case of non - polar solvent where the ions , the anion , carbanion and the counter ion are tight , then it is , if it is the size is higher , the , the ions are little loose , so the reactions is higher .
So , in case of , in case of polar solvent for a given anion , lithium will , lithium cation will have a higher reactivity than sodium and potassium , cesium , and in a non - polar medium it would be , order would be reverse .
Now , what is the temperature of the reaction ?
In case of anionic polymers it is little complicated and it is not very generic way .
You can actually explain the effect of temperature in case of anionic polymerization .
It depends upon the ion - pair and the solvent , on the polarity of the solvent , but to say , at least , that in polar solvent you have .
What happens if you increase the polar solvent , polarity of the solvent ?
The contact ion - pair gets separated and this process , by this process the ion individual ions gets solvated and as a result , its exothermic process .
Now , say , exothermic process , if you increase the temperature , the ions would be preferred to left hand side , which means , the ions will be moved towards tight ion - pairs sides , you know , comparatively .
So , if you compare between the , within the , let me write down , write down these things , so in a polar solvent you have , say contact .
As I said , all these are , these ion - pair aggregation are in equilibrium , they are always a very fast equilibrium , equilibrium exists between these two , say solvent separated ion - pair .
As you know , these would have higher reactivity and higher reaction compared to these and this has exothermic reaction .
So , if you increase the temperature what happens ?
This , this goes to left hand side , so in by and increase the proportion of contact ion - pair in this equilibrium and by that it decreases the rate of the reaction in non - polar solvent .
Basically , there is no salvation , so del h is 0 , so basically the temperature has minimal effect in terms of reaction rate .
Sometimes what happened in case of non - polar solvent , this aggregation of the initiator molecules , for example , like butane lithium , we just talked about the non - polar medium , butane lithium could be existing in an aggregated form .
Now , that aggregation could be , could be affected by temperature and it is actually lower temperature .
The aggregation is less , so as a result if you decrease the temperature the aggregation become less , so the reaction become faster , so the reaction rate goes up .
So , in both cases , actually , decreasing the temperature actually might give you better , a higher reaction rate .
So , we have now discussed , that kinetics , the rate of reaction in case of anionic polymerization .
And let us talk about the molecular weight of , molecular weight of the resulting polymers in , in an anionic polymerization .
Now , we know , for a chain polymerization how you define the molecular rate , if we calculate , these are moles of monomers consumed divided by the moles of polymer chains produced .
The moles of monomer , monomer chains , monomer consumes is given by the conversion multiplied by initiator in initial concentration of the monomer , whereas the moles of polymer chains is nothing but the moles of initiator molecules present at the beginning .
Now , we will have to add a factor k , the k is 1 for case of initiation , where each initiator molecules forming one chain , like butyl lithium case , organ butyl lithium case , where each initiator molecules are actually forming one chain .
Now , in case of electro - transfer initiation , 2 , remember , that the sodium - naphthalene case , actually 2 initiator molecules are forming 1 chain , so you have to multiply a factor 2 for that .
So , electro , normal the most cases k is 1 and there are cases like the initiation by the electron transfer reaction where you have biradical , a chain goes from both the sides , so basically the number of chains actually become half effectively .
So , the molecular weight becomes twice , so k is 2 for initiation by electron transfer initiation .
If , if you have monomers , which , whose ceiling temperature , like alpha methyl styrene , alpha methyl styrene , which are very few where , whose ceiling temperature is very low , then you cannot just use this as such , then you have to consider the depolymerization reaction as well .
But in most of the cases , this ceiling temperature is quite high compared to our reaction temperature .
So , those depolymerization reaction do not contribute at all , so we do not have to worry about the backward reaction .
So , we can use this expression to determine the number average degrees of polymerization in an ionic polymerization .
Now , what about the polydispersity ?
M w by M n , now this remains very narrow , say , less than 1.05 , something like that .
It remains very narrow as long as your initiation rate is much faster compared to propagations , so all the chains actually start .
As long as we maintain this , this happens , then all the chains starts from same time and proceed or propagate for same time , so the polydispersity becomes very narrow and so , as long as you maintain or the reaction have initiation reaction is faster compared to propagation reaction .
Now , also there is no termination reaction , if your , if your termination reaction , then number of chains would increase , then the expected one and as a result , your polidispersity would go up .
So , as long as we maintain pure environment where you reduce or minimize or make no termination reaction and your initiation rate is much faster compared to propagation step , then you can actually get assured , that the polydispersity in anionic polymerization would be very narrow , so less than 1.05 .
So , let us now compare few practical considerations .
Now , we know , that we , we know , that we actually know all this things , but just to conclude this anionic polymerization part , but in practice what we need to do as we have seen , that the anionic polymerization is very susceptible to the impurities presents like oxygen , carbon dioxide , water , where if the moisture present , it immediately will kill the , kill the anion , carbanion .
So , you have to be very careful , not having any presence of the , this impurities .
All the reagents , which are using monomers and initiator must be extremely pure , there should not be any other impurities because anionic , anionic , carboanions are very reactive , so they can , they can actually get react , they can actually react with the impurities and get terminated .
Now , to create an inert atmosphere , which typically use nitrogen and argon in the lab , so the nitrogen and argon you are using in the lab to create an inert atmosphere , that has to be extremely dry without moisture and extremely pure and that is a really challenging job for the scientist who actually practice this anionic polymerization .
There are several columns by through which they send these gases before they actually can utilize this gases to pure the inert atmosphere in the reaction , in the reaction environment .
And your glasswares has to be cleaned in an , in practice they actually , the , the , the scientist who actually carry out anionic polymerization reaction , they actually film dry , which means , they actually heat the glasswares under flame and then apply vacuum continuously .
So , anything , any oxygen , any moisture , which was absorbed or any impurities , which is , they are in the surface of the glassware , they get , they get cleaned up .
So , as you can now recognize , that it is not a very simple reaction to carry out in a large scale , in industrial scales , where maintaining all these purity , all these reaction conditions are very difficult as also this reactions are typically down .
So , maintaining in a large scale industrial set up is quite difficult .
So , as you expect , that commercial applications of anionic chain polymerization are limited and they are not used for making any polymers , used for making many polymers and they are only utilized for making specifically copolymers and , and some molecular standards , where we require very narrow dispersion , which you can utilize for using standards , as molecular standards , which you can use for molecular weight determination .
So , then end of this module of chain polymerization , let us conclude with just a few basic comparison between the radical and anionic chain polymerization we studied .
And you know , that anionic polymerization is very susceptible to impurities , whereas radical chain polymerization are also sensitive are susceptible , but not to that extent of this ionic polymerization .
You can actually afford to have some degree of this impurities in cases of radical chain polymerization and that is why this radical chain polymerization are utilized in industry , the large set up , much more frequently than ionic chain polymerization .
And ionic chain polymerization is very sensitive to solvent polarity , as we discussed from last week ’ s lectures and especially for anionic polymerization .
Radical polymerizations are not sensitive in general , but there are some polar monomers , which can be sensitive to solvent polarity , but in general radical , as long as the monomers are soluble in the solvent you are using , your reaction should proceed well .
Ionic reactions are generally carried out at ambient or lower temperature .
As we have discussed , activation energy for radical reactions are much higher compared to the ionic group , ionic polymerization , which are very low and sometimes negative .
So , as a result , radical polymerization is done at comparably higher temperature and typically higher than 50 degree centigrade in the lab and the industry .
And this is obvious , that radical scavengers stops , radical inhibits radical polymerization whereas it has no effect on ionic polymerization and this is , this is what , why you take trouble of all these reaction conditions for ionic polymerization .
These ionic polymerizations can be easily employed to tailor - made copolymers , like block copolymers , anionic polymers , which have a very niche applications where you do not need any larger quantity , but in small .
If you require small amount , then you can utilize this anionic polymerization or cationic polymerization , especially anionic polymerization , which are very useful to making block copolymer go with this .
We come to the end of this module on chain polymerization .
What we now start is chain copolymerization , so let us start our discussion on chain copolymerization .
Now , you remember , when we talk about step polymers , give example how you make a step copolymerization , if you have , say , two different acids , di - acids , you can react with diol and make a polyester and in that case it is a copolyester because it has got R dash and it actually consists of two monomers , two different di - acids .
Now , as you anticipate or you realize , that in case of step copolymers the final co , copolymer should have same monomer , same ratio of the monomers as in the feed because as we know , that to make a high , high molecular polymer in case to step polymerization , the conversation has to be close to 100 percent and if its conversation is 100 percent , all the monomers actually are in polymer .
So , what is the feed ratio of the different monomers has to be same as in the polymers as a copolymers as well .
And we also know , that chain step polymers actually is equilibrium polymerization , where the reaction is slow and different tapes are different sizes of polymer or polymers are in equilibrium .
So , at the end , you will variably land up in a random copolymer , random arrangement of these two monomers , two functional , two monomers unless specific tapes where the reactions rates are very high .
For example , reactions between acid chloride and alcohol and if you take out that , if you take out the resulting polymer from the solution , then there is a possibility , that you can get the arrangement of this two monomers other than random .
For example , block in block nature , but in normal cases , in normal case , step polymer always gives you random copolymer .
What happens in cases of chain copolymerization ?
Say , if you start with two monomers , M 1 , M 2 , you can have M 3 , then typically we write , terpolymer , and that mostly three types of arrangement .
So , if you consider M 1 and M 2 , this three types of copolymers , you can have , which I think I have discussed in the first lecture , introduction one , these M 1 and M 2 , the two monomers can get into the copolymer chain , statistically following a statistical law and one of the laws could be the Bernoullian statistics , which is basically nothing but the random arrangements of this molecules without any bias .
So , like there is no bias on the incorporation of the two monomers one after one , so there could be other statistical law , which the monomers can follow , but this small example , which actually gives a complete random arrangement of these two monomers .
So , this is statistical copolymer and this particular case of , which is lot of time to make this two as equivalent , but they are not , in true sense they are not equivalent , random copolymers are not always statistical copolymers , but of course statistical copolymers are random copolymers .
Only the statistical , statistical copolymers , which follow this law , they are called random copolymers , which are very common anywhere .
Most of statistical copolymers are random copolymers , but not always .
The second type is alternate copolymer where you have alternate , exactly alternate arrangement of this two monomer and third is block , block copolymer where you have a significant longer chain of say , M 1and a significantly longer chain of M 3 .
It could be repetition of this , one polymer chain could have several blocks , but this length should be significantly higher so that we can call them block .
Now , block copolymers also could be different types , like linear , the type we just showed .
It could be graft , graft block copolymer where basically one chain all form M 1 and with side chain of M 2 it could have brass arrangement where basically , where project into two - dimensional where you have surface of a , and the brasses are hanging of the other monomers .
So , you can basically extend this graft polymer into another dimension to get brass copolymer .
So , these are basically block copolymers , which have a long sequence of two different monomers .
Now , why do we need co polymer ?
What is the utility , importance ?
Now , with a homopolymer , with all the examples , we talked about polystyrene , poly methyl methaculate , polyvinyl acetenol and all these things , actually you can , the options are very , very few , in true sense you can have only a set a homopolymers , not much .
You can actually name a lot of homopolymers , but they are , they are , that all the homopolymers , so your options are limited with homopolymers .
If you make copolymers , if you take M 1 and M 2 , then you can choose from that monomer set and get several combination of M 2 , M 1 and M 2 and not only that , for a given set of two monomers you can make different compositions , 0 100 , 10 90 to 90 10 and different compositions of , not only you have choices of choosing two different monomers from a state of monomers , also you have choice of making different composition of this copolymer .
So , basically there is a unlimited number of polymers , you can , copolymers you can make or polymers you can make by using copolymer .
Now , you can argue that you can mix this homopolymers or make a blend .
You can always argue , that ok , I have all those homopolymers , now I can mix them in different proportions to get the composition of what I want , which will finally give the same composition , which you might get in the copolymers .
But what happen if you start with two different homopolymers and mix them ?
Lot of time they do not mix , you know , we will talk about , maybe , later , later part of the this course , that polymers usually , hike , high molecular polymers , they do not exactly mix well .
So , what happens ?
You require a combination of homopolymer or combination of monomers .
So , to get an average or to improve properties , so what we will do ?
We will start from this importance part in the next lecture and we will talk about the details of chain copolymerization in the next lecture .
Welcome back to this 15th lecture of the Polymer Chemistry course .
I should say that , welcome to the 15th lecture of this polymer chemistry course , and in this course in this lecture today , we will continue our discussion on polymer polymerization processes , different processes we start discussing in the last lecture .
And then we will talk about in little detail about emulsion polymerization , and then we will begin in this lecture or sort of introduce the concept of living radical polymerization in this lecture .
So , just recap last 2 lectures , we discussed in detail effect of temperature on the rate of polymerization and molecular weight .
And we found that in most cases it will increase the temperature , the polymerization rate goes up and thermal molecular weight also comes down , except the case of growth of polymerization .
And we discussed the effect of pressure , on the rate of polymerization molecular weight in very briefly , and we talked about thermodynamics of chain growth polymers , we talked about the ceiling temperature , and relations between ceiling temperature and the monomer concentration at equilibrium .
And then we talked about the dependence of monomer structure on the value or the values of the del h and del s , the enthalpy change and the entropy change , how that those values depend on the structure of the monomer depending upon how the double bond in a monomer is stabilized or the polymer is strained or not .
And then we just began with different processes of making polymers , by radical chain polymerization , and we talked about bulk and solutions solution polymerization in last lecture .
We also talked about suspension polymerization , in last lecture we will let us start with suspension polymerization once again in this lecture .
Now , suspension polymerization as we talked about in last lecture that it is a heterogeneous polymerization , where you have monomer and monomer soluble initiator , and you have aqueous medium , and dispersions which actually absorbed on the monomer droplets .
And prevent them sterically to collide each other , and aqueous and make larger particles , and this dispersions are typically water soluble polymers like polyethylene , polyvinyl alcohols or polyaniline pyrrolidone and so on .
And it could be some inorganic particles as well which we which can absorb on the monomer particle size .
Now , depression a suspension polymers is similar to the bulk polymerization except that in this case , you have this tiny droplets which are dispersed in the aqueous medium , whereas in the bulk bulk polymerization , there was no such case .
So , in this case as we discussed in the last lecture , what you do we actually dissolve the initiator in monomer , and then heat it to the required temperature , or the temperature we are planning to do the polymerization reaction .
Then the dispersion medium which is a aqueous solution with the with the dispersions or added and stirred vigorously .
Now , vigorous stirring form this monomer droplets into small size , which is around this 100 to 500 microns and they are remain they remains stable , because they are surrounded or absorbed by the dispersion molecules .
So , they actually , this dispersion molecule prevent this droplets to collide each other , and form a large particles .
And this kinetics of suspension polymerization is same as the bulk polymerization , the advantage is because you have this aqueous medium present as diluents , so it is the heat dissipation which that heat which formed due to the polymerization reaction .
You can easily take out the heat , because of the dispersing medium , so no such problem in case of , as in the case of bulk polymerization .
And because the concentration in those monomer droplets , the concentration of monomer in those monomer droplets is high , similar to bulk polymerization , so the rate of polymerization as well as molecular weights is also high .
And polymers produced in this case are in the form of beads droplets , so you can simply at the end of the polymerization you can just separate out the beads by filtering process .
And these beads should not stick to each other , if you are planning to filter the beads from the reaction medium , so it should be such that the beads should not stick to each other .
And it happens if the polymer you have synthesized or you have produced is rigid , so that and also there the temperature at which is below their glass transition temperature , so that they are not soft either , so basically they do not stick to each other .
So , these polymerization procedures are mainly for applied mainly for the polymers where glass transition temperature is well above the room temperature , room temperature like PMMA polymethylmethacrylate and so on .
But not everything is good in this case , also there are disadvantages as well , now because you are planning to take out the polymerization at the end of the reaction in the form of beads , and take it to the application , the polymerization must complete .
So , you should be able to take the polymerization till the equilibrium , it should be such a way that it should be able to complete the reaction as much as possible .
And auto acceleration , because it is a bulk polymerization auto acceleration will also happen , but that is not , in this case this is not that much problematic like the case of pure bulk polymerization .
And if you do not want the polymers in bead shape , you want the polymer as such in a powder shape or shape whatever , and then because the polymers are formed in beads bead form , it is very sometimes it becomes very difficult , if you want to isolate the polymers in the form other than beads .
And of course this beads are absorbed , beginning they are absorbed with this dispersions like water soluble , polymer of the inorganic , particles we have to make sure you watch this beads thoroughly several times , to get rid of this dispersion .
But even though there could be possibilities of this dispersion remaining in the polymer beads as impurities , so these are the disadvantages .
And as I said these are used for the polymers that whose glass transition temperature is way above room temperature , like methylmethacrylate other acrylate esters , vinyl acetate , vinyl chloride , and so on .
Another type of heterogeneous polymerization is dispersion polymerization , in this case you have monomer dissolved in organic solvent , and the initiator is also dissolved in organic solvent and in this case also you have organic soluble dispersion .
Now , in this case the polymers which form they are in soluble in the solvent , so in absence of dispersion they would have precipitated from the solution .
But because you have dispersion present in the medium , this polymer polymers will remain , they will the dispersion will get absorbed on the surface of this polymer , and the polymers should remain as dispersion in the polymerization medium .
Now , new monomers will get absorbed on to this polymer particles , and the polymerization will take place on that monomer , so polymer remains dispersed , because the present of dispersions .
And polymers grow in size as the absorbed monomers on this polymer molecules they get polymerized , and in this case the size of polymers are below of the size , what we achieved for a suspension polymers , say about 1 to 10 microns .
Other is heterogeneous polymers like inversion suspension polymerization , is exactly the opposite inverse of suspension polymers , where the monomer is water soluble , and the dispersion medium is organic solvent .
For example , acrylamide the polymerization in acrylamide in organic solvent , the other polymer type like microsuspension polymerization where the size of the beads are in much smaller micro domain , so the name microsuspension polymers are used .
And it could be the polymerization could be done in an emulsion , now we will talk in more detail about this emulsion polymerization now .
Now , in case in emulsion polymerization , you have apparently singular composition , monomer water has a medium , surfactants has a dispersions , but the only difference in this case is that in this case you have water soluble initiator .
In this suspension case you have monomer soluble initiator ; you have water soluble initiator , now apparently its looks that this is small difference , but this has very far reaching implications in terms of the mechanism and the kinetics of the polymerization process in emulsion .
The mechanism and the kinetics in case of emulsion polymerization do not follow a normal chain reaction polymerization kinetics or mechanism , as was the case for the earlier 4 , 5 process , we just talked about this mechanism and kinetics for emulsion process are quiet different and complex , and still not completely understood .
So , research was still under way to understand the mechanism of the emulsion polymerization process .
Now , the product of at the end of the polymerization , you get the product , the polymer product as dispersed particles not a bead not a large beads like suspension polymers , that there is a much smaller size about say 0.05 to 1 micron size , particles which are dispersed in a aqueous medium .
Now , often this product of emulsion polymerization are termed as latex , and this latex can be directly used in several applications like paint , coatings and many other applications where you can directly take the you can directly take the polymer product at the end of the emulsion , and apply is as a as a painting or coatings .
Of course , you have to have add the required pigment for or additives other additives for painting applications or so on , so as I said the size of the particles are much smaller than suspensions polymers , is about 0.05 to 1 micron .
And of course , the similar type of advantages are there as in the case of suspension polymers , the heat removal is not a problem , viscosity build up is also not a problem in this case .
One of the major advantages , one of the distinct advantage for emulsion polymerization which is highlighted here is that unlike other radical polymerization , for a fixed monomer concentration the molecular weight can be increased without compromising the polymerization rate .
We know from our discussion from last few lectures that , if you want to increase the polymerization rate either by increasing the temperature , or by increasing the initiator concentration what happen , polymerization rate goes up , but simultaneously the molecular weight comes down .
But , this is the case where keeping the monomer concentration fixed , you can increase the polymerization rate without compromising the molecular weight , or you can increase the molecular weight without compromising the compromising the polymerization .
Now , we will discuss more on the mechanistic part in a minute , and then we will understand this point , with little more clarity .
And it are used for monomers at acetate , methylmethacrylate and other acrylate polymers , and it also applied for that copolymers like styrene , ABS and rubber and fluoronitated to the olefins .
Now , this emulsion polymerization is of great industrial importance , in lot of industrial polymers are made by this process , and it started at the time of world war two .
When this first example of emulsion polymerization was done , which was emulsion polymerization was used to synthesize , used to synthesize a rubber , synthetic rubber or styrene and butadiene , which was first example of synthetic rubber .
And that was synthesized during the world war two by emulsion polymerization , and that that had a great importance in the outcome of the result of the war .
So , of the process we discussed emulsion polymerization is of great importance industrially , you should remember that .
Now , let us let us go back and look at the mechanism of the emulsion polymerization , now what are the constitutes , now say at the beginning what are the constitutions we have , we have monomers which is water insoluble or slightly soluble , very slightly soluble in water .
Now , we have initiator which is water soluble , these are typically thus the per sulfate potassium or sodium per sulfate or redox initiators we talked about , when you talked about different types of initiators .
And we have surfactant , now surfactants act as a dispersant stabilizer of the large monomer droplets will come to that , and it also act as a solubilizer of the monomers molecules in it is core .
And it is also called emulsifier , because it is responsible for emulsifying the medium , so it is also calls emulsifier , and it is used at quite high concentration , if we remember the concentration of the dispersant in suspension polymers , it was around 0.01 weight percent .
But in this case it is much higher , so 0.1 to 3 weight percent and of course , this concentration are quite high , and it is far greater than the critical micelle aggregation critical micelle aggregation concentration , CMC of the surfactant .
So , most of the surfactant molecules present at in this water medium as micelles , as you can appreciate that , because the surfactant concentration is quite high and CMC of the surfactants are quite low .
So , the most of the surfactant molecules are present as or present in , micelles , and micelles if you are not aware micelles are aggregation of surfactants which because it has surfactant has about hydrophobic and hydrophilic components by forming micelles .
This molecule can hide the hydrophobic parts from aqueous environment , and they form aggregates , and typically this aggregate are of size of 2 to 10 nanometer .
And they have aggregation numbers which means the number of surfactants per micelle is around 50 to 150 , this numbers depends on the different kinds of surfactants .
Now , generally anionic surfactants are used for emulsion polymerization , and typically these are salts of fatty acids , salt of salts of fatty acids , like sodium or potassium salts of palmitic or stearate or laurateo or it has sulfates like sodium lauryl sulphates or sodium dodecyl sulfate or sulfonate , like sodium benzene , benzene sulfonate .
So , these are typical anionic surfactant used in this emulsion polymerization process , and typical concentration of are the ratio of water is to monomer is taken as say about 70 30 to 60 40 by weight .
Now , of course if you require the control of molecular weight chain transfer , agent , origins can be added if you require or as required by the scientist ; so you know what are the ingredients are there in a emulsion polymerization system .
Now , let us see what happens at the beginning at the beginning t is equal to 0 , you have water with initiator , so I let us draw something like this , so this is a inside is a water medium , so you have initiator molecules dissolved in the water molecule , when you add surfactants , surfactants will form micelles .
Now , I am just drawing this cartoons , they could mean they will be many micelles , so let us let me draw through here , now I am drawing a spherical micelle that does not mean that all the micelles or spherical or all the time micelles are spherical .
Micelles are this surfactant aggregates can be other types as well depending up on the concentration of the surfactant , or the or the composition of the aqueous medium , whether there are salt present or not , it could be cylindrical or lamellar or other aggregates can be possible .
So , in this case lets draw for simplistic spherical micelles , so you have surfactants mainly as micelles , but also you have free surfactant in the water medium ; the concentration of this surfactants are CMC .
Now , if you add monomer , now obviously there will be slight solubility , very slight solubility , so you have I write M for the monomer , so you have few monomer molecules , very small amount of monomer I write M , they are dissolved in water .
A small amount of monomer are are will be present or will be solubilized in the surfactant core , because we know that surfactant cores are hydrophobic in nature , which means they can this like core ; so they can solubilize any non polar or hydrophobic molecules inside .
So , when you add monomers there are very small fractions of monomer present in a soluble , in a water medium , is very a small fraction of present as as a soluble inside the surfactant micelle .
And a large amount of monomer present as monomers droplets which are stabilized by the surfactant , so let me tell you one more time that at beginning we dissolved the initiator in the water , and then when we add the surfactants surfactant form micelles , many micelles ; and there will be some surfactant as a free molecules in the water medium .
Now , when you add the monomers a very small fraction of monomer would be soluble in the aqueous medium , there will be small fraction of the monomer inside the micelle core as a soluble .
And large fraction actually is greater 95 percent of the fraction of the monomers will be present as large droplets .
Now , let me tell you few numbers , the concentration of surfactant micelle say micelle and around 10 to the power 19 to 10 to the power 21 liter inverse , so per liter of this you have this many micelles .
And concentration of monomer droplets droplets , they are of the order of 10 to the power 12 to 10 to the power of 14 liter inverse , now they are all this monomer droplet are stabilized , again by absorption of the surfactants .
Now , the this the solubility of the monomer or the partition of the monomer outside micelle , and in the aqueous medium would depend on the solubility of the monomer in aqueous solution .
For example , if you consider three monomers like styrene , butadiene , and methylmethacrylate , the solubility in water of these free monomers are gram per liter , butadiene 0.8 gram per liter , whereas MMA is 16 gram per liter .
Obviously , the less the soluble , the monomer is in the aqueous medium they will try to partition more inside the micelles .
So , the factor , the amount of monomer inside the micelle by the amount of monomer outside the micelle in aqueous solution are of this order 40 , 5 and 2 this numbers is the ratio of the amount of monomer inside the micelle , and outside , outside means as a dissolved monomer .
Obviously , styrene has a minimum solubility in the water , so they will it will partition more inside the micelles , so it has the amount of monomer inside the micelles much more compared to MMA which has a higher solubility in water .
So , as I said 95 percent , more than 95 percent of the monomer present as large droplets , now large droplet size , this droplet size is about say 1 to 100 micron which has quite large compared to the sizes of the surfactant micelle .
So , if you will compare this number and the size , then total surface area total surface area of the micelles which will be much greater than the total surface area of the monomer droplets .
Because , the number of micelles are much more huge compared to the monomer droplets , obviously even though the sizes of the micelles are smaller than the monomer droplets , the total surface area or the micelles are considerably higher compared to the total surface area of the monomer droplets .
So , this is the situation , I hope you are clear what at the beginning of the emulsion polymerization , now you start a polymerization that mean initiator is forming say radical .
Now , what happened if initiator forms radical , initiator is forming radical , now this radical will react with the monomer present in the aqueous medium and form .
Because , the concentration of this monomers is quite low , so they can only form oligomeric species , and also this oligomeric species oligomeric species or oligomeric radical , propagating radical they are also not soluble in water .
So , they will try to find a place to go , are you clear I is forming giving rise to initiator radical say R dot , now R dot will react with M the concentration of M is very small , so R dot will react with M and form oligomeric propagating radical .
Now , because M itself is very insoluble , you know slightly soluble in water , so obviously the oligomeric radical will be even more insoluble in water .
So , it will try to find space to go , now it can go inside micelle or it can go the monomer droplets , because that is the place where you have hydrophobic environment .
Now , because the surface area of the micelles are much more , it is always 99 percent plus or even more , time radical or a primary radical or a propagating radical , oligomeric propagating radical will move into a surfactant micelle containing the monomer molecules ; rather than moving into a monomer droplets .
Now , that is very important concept and here the primary radical or the propagating radical , they will move into the micelle core , and start the reaction immediately the polymerization reaction , rather than entering this monomer droplets .
So , polymerization does not take place in the monomer droplet , actually if you stop the reaction after sometime , you will find that less than 1 percent , actually less than 0.01 percent polymerization polymerization happens in the monomer droplet .
Most of the polymerization happens inside this surfactant micelles , now what happened once the polymer on the propagating radical or the primary radical gets into this micellar core , they will start the polymerization reaction .
Now , once they start the polymers reaction , the monomer concentration will be lower because monomer is getting converted into polymer .
So , monomer will be supplied from the bulk via or monomer will be supplied again inside the micellar core and to maintain the equilibrium , this monomer droplet will supply the monomer in the solution , are you clear .
Polymerization happening inside the miceller core , monomer concentration get depleted , so the monomers inside the micelle , this monomer droplets will become smaller by supplying micelle , supplying monomer to the miceller core via , this aqueous medium .
So , what happen slowly this micelle core will become something like this is larger , so after some time you have this is say polymer particle , and this concern polymer particle and free monomer , and your surfactant micelle grows in size .
Now , you cannot call this as a surfactant micelle in more is basically , now you can have to name polymer particle plus free monomer stabilized by absorption of surfactant , you got it .
So , more and more of this will generate and to stabilize this , you require more and more surfactant , the number of surfactant which was originally present ; in the micelle they are not sufficient to stabilize this .
Where from they will get they will get this surfactant micelle , they will get this surfactant , there are other micelle where the polymerization is not started , when you start this polymerization this radical will not go in all the micelle containing monomer .
Because , this number is much higher compared to the number of primary radicals , for example the radical concentration typically at the beginning is R dot , beginning is 10 to the power 16 liter inverse , whereas we know that concentration of micelle around 10 to power 21 ; so it is basically 10 to the power of 5 times number of micelles .
So , what happen that the radical will go in small number of micelles which will grow , and form particles surrounded by the surfactant .
Now , as this particles form more and more , the this requires more and more surfactant molecules to get stabilized , which will be supplied by the micelle , which are not taking part in polymerization reaction or the inactive micelles .
This is the micelles where polymerization is taking place we call them active micelles , and the micelles where polymerization is not taking place we call inactive micelle .
So , inactive micelles will slowly break releasing the monomer in the solution , and the they will supply the surfactant through the growing polymer particles .
So , what happened soon as situation will come where the all the surfactant actually consumed , and you have a fixed number of particles which are active , where the polymerization is going on .
So , if you plot the conversion , we plot the conversion with time as more and more active micelle form or the polymerization takes place in more and micelle more and more my micelles .
The rate or conversion goes up to a certain one point , where all the micelle are all the the inactive micelles they are broken down realizing all the surfactant .
So , every surfactant , every micelle which are present , they all active micelle or they have already turned into the polymer particle surrounded by the surfactant molecules .
So , that is this happens within 2 to 10 percent of conversion , and we call this part as a stage I , so if you plot the rate of the polymer , polymerization rate with time as more and more and more this active micelles or the more and more micelles take part in the polymerization rate goes up .
At the end of this stage I , the surfactant are consumed , so you have fixed number of particles , particles I mean polymer particles plus free monomer surround by the surfactant molecules , so they have now fixed in number .
So , no more increase in the number of particles , hence no more increase in the rate of polymerization , so that is the end of stage II a stage I .
Now , what happened stage II , now you have what you have now , you have large monomer droplets still present of course , the size is sunk from the beginning and you have the initiator molecules , and you have such particles , particles means monomer plus polymer surrounded by the surfactant molecules , that is a stage at the end of the stage I .
So , at the one more time , at the end of stage I you have large monomer droplets stabilized by the absorption of surfactant molecules of course , the this size has sunk from the beginning , you have the initiator molecules still present in the in the solution , you have monomer molecules as well .
And you have polymer particles , which are polymer particles plus free monomers surrounded by or stabilized by the absorption of the surfactant molecules , this has formed by the polymerization in the surfactant micelles , there are no free micelle in this time .
Now , what happened here as more and more reaction happen , the monomer concentration get depleted , so to supply more monomers this size of this , monomer droplets comes down , and it is supplied to this reacting polymer particles .
And because the monomer concentration inside these particle are almost remain constant , so the polymerization rate remain almost constant , throughout this stage II .
So , what happen in this stage II , what is happing in stage II one more time , monomer is getting into as the polymerization progress , monomer is getting depleted and that is relinquished by the supply of monomer from this droplet via the aqueous medium .
So , the size of this monomer is becoming smaller and smaller , and will vanish at the end of stage II , so at the stage II you have only this particles , no surfactant , free surfactant micelles , neither you have free droplets .
So , what happen now , now this will continue the reaction till you have the monomer present in this reaction , so the monomer concentration inside this polymerization reactor comes down .
So , the reaction rate also comes down , and till the reaction is over , so that is stage III , stage III gets completed when this reactions gets completed .
So , you I hope you understand all this stage I , stage II , and stage III , one more time stage I is completed when all this inactive size surfactant micelles gets broken , into for supplying surfactants to the active micelles .
Stage II , at the end of stage II all the monomer droplets disappeared , because the monomer has been supplied to the reacting polymer particle , surrounded by the surfactant molecules , and stage III is basically the completion of the polymerization reaction inside those reacting , or active polymer particles .
Now , if we want to look at the kinetics part for this emulsion process , let us call define n bar which is the average number of radicals in a single particle , there are many such particles .
So , average number of moles of radical in a single particle is n bar by N A , N A is the abogados number .
So , the rate of polymerization inside one particle , one polymer particle is given by we know the expression , K p M p where this is the monomer concentration inside one particle , and the radical concentration which is given by this that is from our knowledge .
Now , let us imagine what happened inside this particle , you have a polymerization reaction going on at beginning you have a micelle at the beginning you had this micelles , with solon with this monomers one of this R dot or a oligomeric propagating radical gets into this thing , they start polymerization .
Now , this polymerization continue till second radical gets into this reactor , because the size is very small , so if the second radical gets in the effective radical concentration goes high , so the immediately the bimolecular termination reaction happen .
So , at any point of time it could be 1 radical or it could be 0 radical , it can ever have more than 1 radical , because as soon as the second radical gets into the this medium or this polymer particle , they will the 2 radicals will terminate will do the bimolecular reaction and terminate .
So , at any point of time there are two possibilities , either you can have 1 polymerization is progressing with 1 propagating radical , or it have a 0 polymer radical polymer , 0 radicals in this .
Now , because the radical are entering into this micelles or the particles randomly , the probability that at any point of time the probability that any point of time a particle have a 1 or 0 radical is same , you understand that can it can have either 1 radical or a 0 radical , it cannot have more than 1 radical .
And that is because the this radicals are entering into this micelles or the polymer particles randomly , the probability that you will find at any point of time , the chances or the probability of finding at any point of time 1 radical or 0 radical is same .
That means the average number of radicals in 1 particle is half , because the probability of finding 1 radical and no radical is same , so probability of finding 1 radical is or the average number of radical is half .
So , n bar is half , so we can write M p by twice N A , now you have , if you have N p is a number of such particles , then total this is the total reaction rate will given the by the rates in individual particle multiplied by the total number of particles .
So , that is the rate of polymerization , and this can be increased by increasing N p which is the number of such particle , which is taking part in the reaction , that can be increased by increasing the surfactant concentration or by increasing the number of micelles .
If you increase the number of micelles , then it is likely that number of micelles is taking part in polymerization is more compared to a situation , we you have less number of micelle .
So if we increase the number of micelles by increasing the surfactant concentration , you will increase a N p , and then you will increase the rate of polymerization , what is the molecular weight .
Now , kinetic chain length in this case is same as degrees of polymerization , we talked about this before that , if you have two kinetic chain , and if they are if they are terminating by a combination reaction , then the molecular weights double .
Then the length of the kinetic chain or if they are doing a termination by this propagation , then they are the X n is same as the kinetic chain length .
But in this case , because the how does it terminate termination happens , it happens as soon as the second one gets in , so if you have a polymer particle of this size which was undergoing the propagation , now you have some second radical comes in and they will undergo immediately termination reaction .
Now , this size , the size of this radicals or size of this oligomeric propagating radical is much smaller , very oligomeric in nature , so whether they terminate by this propagation or they terminate by a combination , the size of the final dead chain is same as a size of this kinetic chain length .
You can ignore or this size of size contribution due to this entering propagating radical is insignificant , so we can write chain degrees of polymerization that is in , and the polymerization is forming in a particle .
So , we can write the rate of polymerization by rate of initiation in a particle , so r p we know we have just now deduced , this is M p by 2 A N A that is r p .
Now , r i is what , is given by N p by R I , where R i is the total initiation rate , total number of initiator is generating and N p is the number of particle where they are going , so for one particle the initiation would be given by R i by N p .
So , R i which is initiation rate for single particle will be total of initiator rate by the number of particles , so I just putting this R i here to get this , so you get the molecular weight as this .
So , if you fix or if you do not change the initiation reaction , the molecular weight again goes up with N p , so with single handle by just increasing N p , you can now increase the molecular weight of the polymer .
And at the same time you can increase the polymerization rate , which is not happened in earlier case , where if you increase the initiation rate the polymer molecular weight comes down at the same , where the polymerization rate goes up .
So , this is one very advantages advantage of your emulsion polymerization where N p as N p goes up , which you can achieve by increasing the surfactant concentration and increasing the number of micelle .
Or miceller concentration with both the R p rate of polymerization goes up ; as well as the number average degrees of polymerization .
Now , at any point of time you can find out the size of this emulsion polymer , the particles like miceller particles or the droplets by help of this electron microscopic or light scattering or inter centrifugation .
If you want to prove in a reaction , if you promote the reaction , you know find out what is the size of this your polymer particles or so on , so I hope you understood this emulsion polymerization part .
And what we will do we will next move to the discussion on living radical polymerization , now we by this time we know that molecular weight in a normal polymerization , radical polymerization comes down .
In a steady state the molecular weight comes down as time goes , sorry it is the other way round , molecular goes up and as time progresses or time increases .
I am talking about steady state , because most of the time reaction happens in a steady state , if gel effect or other complication happen , then the situation is more complicated to simply conclude .
So , the polymers form at the beginning will have low molecular weight , whereas if you increase or when the polymers is producing later on during the reaction , the size increases that we have we have rationalized .
Because , the concentration of monomer also goes down , concentration on initiator also goes down , but as the concentration initiator goes down faster than the monomer , so effectively the monomer molecular weight increases .
It also true for normal radical polymerization that that the polymers are dead , which means that you , once the polymerization is complete you cannot take this polymers and add the second monomer to make a black copolymer , or something like rather that .
So , if you design a mechanism by which you can start all the polymers together , so if you design , can design a mechanism or you can start all the polymer together , and let all this polymer all this polymers undergo polymerization or propagation for same duration .
For you have you have initiator lot of polymers together , all the polymers together and you have continuing all this polymers all this polymers is undergoing polymer propagation reaction , this during the same duration .
Now , that is the only possible , if this polymers are live that means they do not undergo this bimolecular termination reaction , if they undergo bimolecular termination reaction they will be dead immediately , and they will not be able to continue the propagation chain .
So , what we will do and if they are live , they will remain live at the end of the polymerization as well , if they can live all this time , which is quite a longer time compared to a termination reaction .
Then there is no reason why they will be dead at the end of the polymerization , so they will be still be live at the end of the polymerization , so you can use this and make the block copolymers .
So , what we will do in the next lecture , we will talk about the strategies by which we can achieve this situation this situations , so that we can make all the polymer chains of similar size , because they are started from same time , and continue it for same time .
So , all the polymers should be of similar size the will be lower , and they will be live all the time , so say the at the end of the polymerization , they will also be live .
So , we will see what are the strategies we can take to make such a requirement fulfilled , so we will talk we will start from this slide in the next lecture .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
In this lecture thirteen , we plan to cover effect of temperature on rate of polymerization and molecular weight , and also we will start our discussion on thermodynamics of chain growth polymerization .
Before I start this subject , just recap the subject matter what we discussed in the last two lectures .
We discussed the various types of chain transfer reactions possible in radical polymerization , and their effect ; effect on molecular weight in principle , that modes are chain , more chain transfer happen , molecular weight actually gets reduced compared to if there was no chain transfer reaction .
We talked about gel effect and we also talked about the effect of glass - transition temperature on the resulting polymer , effect of glass transition temperature of the resulting polymer on polymerization process .
Now , let us start what is the effect of temperature on the polymer , polymerization rate and the resulting molecular weight .
Now , first let us consider , consider the case of thermal initiation .
We know that in case of thermal polymerization R p is given by k p M f k d I k t half .
You also know that X n bar , the number average degrees of polymerization is given by expression , we have deduced this expression in earlier lectures , so you should be knowing this very well , where b is the average number of initiator residues per polymer molecules .
Now , from this reaction , if you look at the equation little carefully you can find out , that if the monomer concentration increases both R p and the number average degrees of polymerization increases , which is the molecular weight .
If the initiator concentration increases , then R p goes up , rate of polymerization goes up , but X n bar or the molecular weight comes down .
So , what is the effect of temperature on R p and X n is we are going to discuss now .
Now , the same expression R p , I can divide into two terms , one is temperature dependent and another is temperature independent .
So , if you look at the temperature independent term and put in the left hand side , I can put concentration M f to the power half and I to the power half .
Now , this part is temperature independent , whereas the other term , the rate constant k p k d to the power half and k t to the power half , these are all rate constant values .
So , definitely , they will depend on the temperature of the reaction you were using .
Similarly , you can break down this number of degrees of polymerization , number , average degrees of polymerization into two terms , one is temperature independent , I can break into two terms , this is temperature independent and the other term , k d k t to the power half , so these are temperature dependent .
Now , you also know from basic physical chemistry knowledge , that rate constant can be expressed in form of Arrhenius - type equation expression where you can write rate constant is A e to the power minus E by RT , where k is rate constant , A is the frequency factor , frequency collation factor , E is the activation energy for the reaction .
This is well known to you guys , so you know that .
So , we can express all the three rate constants , k p , k t and k d in terms of Arrhenius equation e to the power minus E p where E p is the activation energy for propagation .
Similarly , k d is A p e to power minus E d and k t is A t e to power minus E t ; E t is the activation energy for termination reaction .
Now , in this , in this expression , this is the expression for rate of propagation and now we know , that the monomer is consumed both , in initiation process and in the propagation process , but because the monomer consumed in the initiation process is very insignificant compared to propagation process , rate of polymerization is equivalent to rate of propagation .
So , we are writing R p as the rate of reaction , which is same as rate of propagation , whereas k p is the rate constant for propagation and E p is the activation energy for propagation .
So , I can take this expression and write this k terms in terms of the Arrhenius equation or else , we can simply write , ln R p from that earlier expression , M f to the power half I to the power half plus ln A p A d to the power , this is A d , to the power half A t to power half minus E p half E d minus half E t by RT .
We can write all this from this Arrhenius - type expression and this is , this term E p plus half E d minus half E t , we are writing as the entropy of the polymerization reaction .
So , entropy of the polymerization is combination of propagation initiation , as well as , termination .
So , depending upon the sign of this activation energy , the rate will depend on the temperature .
We can just simply write d ln R p by dT is plus E R by RT square .
If you differentiate it , you find out the rate with respect to the temperature .
Now , what is the value of E R ?
now , we can , before we talk about the value of E R we can similarly write from the expression of X n .
If you look at these numbers here , k P k d to the power half k t to the power half , here k d is in the down .
So , d ln X n , which gives you the rate of change of molecule , degrees of , average degrees of number , average degrees of polymerization as similarly E X n by RT square , where E X n is E p minus half E d minus half E t .
It is coming from the expression we used in the last page .
Now , what is the value of E R and E X n ?
Now , this will come from the individual values of E p , E d and E t .
Now , as we know the rate constant or rate of the reaction is much faster , for termination is the highest rate and then propagation and then initiation , we can simply write from or that knowledge , that E t is , should be greater than activation energy of , this must be greater than E p because this is the most , this is the fastest reaction and this is also fast reaction where the initiation is a slower reaction .
So , you expect that activation energy for the initiation reaction should be higher than the other two .
Now , what are the typical values of this E d and E t ?
Typical values of E d for thermal initiation process come about 120 to 150 kilo joule per mol , E p comes on 20 to 40 kilo joule per mol and E t is 2 to 20 kilo joule per mol , these are the experimental values .
Now , that gives you the value for E R , around 80 to 90 kilo joule per mol inverse .
That means that the rate will increase rate of polymerization will be , will increase with increase in temperature .
If you plot the rate of polymerization , which is 1 by T , it will be coming down linearly .
Now , this value indicates that for every 10 degree rise , there is around two to three fold , two to three times increase in the rate of polymerization .
So , if T goes up , R p goes up and every decade , every 10 degree centigrade it will be around 2 to 3 times from the original value .
Now , if you calculate the number for E X n , you get around 60 , minus 60 kilo joule per mol inverse , mol inverse , per mol , which means , that degrees of , average degrees of polymerization or the molecular rate , will , will come down as we increase the temperature .
So , if you plot with 1 over T , this is the curve for R p and this will be curve for your X n , X n bar .
So , this is clear to you , that from the experimental values of these activation energies you can justify , that if the temperature goes up , the rate of the polymerization will go up and similar time the molecular weight or the number average degrees of polymerization will come down .
Now , you can justify these in , this way , that once you increase the temperature , the more and more radical gets generated for a given time , like more and more radical gets generated , then more and more polymer forms for a given time .
When more polymer forms , rate of polymers increases , and because the radical concentration increases , increased with temperature , the termination reaction also increase .
So , as the more termination is reaction is going on , the average length of the polymer chains also comes down .
You can justify this drop in molecular weight with increase in temperature and increasing rate of polymerization .
With increase in temperature by just thinking , that with increase you get more number of radical generated in the polymerization medium for a given time .
Now , if we talked about the other initiation process .
This was for thermal initiation processes .
Now , if we talk about the other initiation process , like redox , number two is redox initiation .
Remember , the rate expression for redox reaction , it was k p M k d concentration of reductant twice k t to the power half and X n bar could give you k p to the power M k p m twice over b twice k t k d red ox to the power half .
And again , you can break down this expression in the two terms , one temperature independent and another temperature dependent .
Temperature dependent on terms of the rate constant k p , k d and k t and same , as you can do this and do the same exercise what we did for the thermal initiation and see what is the value of E R in this case .
E R in this case means , for redox initiation , again we will be coming around 40 kilo joule per mol .
Thus , because the E d for this reaction , for this initiation process is much lower compared to a thermal initiation process , that we , while discussion in the initiation , the types of initiation process we mentioned , that redox reaction , you can do it at lower temperature , that is because the activation energy for the initiation reaction is much lower compared to thermal initiator .
Now , that gives , if you use the same thing you will find , that E R is coming around , whereas the values for k p and k t remains same means , the values for E t and E p remains same as the thermal initiation because they are the same reactions we are talking about .
So , if you put all these numbers you will get , that e , E R coming around 40 kilo joule per mol .
So , in this case also , the R p goes up as temperature goes up , but it is not as , as much increase as in the case of thermal initiation process .
Now , what is E X n 0 ?
If you again put this number you will find , that E X n 0 is about 0 kilo joule per mol , which suggest , that there is no effect , no effect of temperature on molecular weight for a redox initiated radical polymerization , redox initiator radical polymerization .
So , what for this type of initiation ?
We know , we found , that temperature increases , rate of polymerization also increases .
Further increase is not as much as in case of thermal polymerization and because the activation energy for the molecular build up is about 0 , which means , there is no effect of the temperature on the molecular weight of redox polymerization , that is why , the redox polymerization are done at room temperature or even sub - roomed temperature because temperature increase would not affect , have no effect on the radical polymerization .
And the , now let us talk about the third type of initiation , which is that photo initiation or photo chemical reactions , photo initiation .
Now , we know again from , of , it gives you phi I a k t to the power half .
This is I a , I a is the intensity of light , phi is the yield .
You do not see k d term because k d is for thermal initiation process , is actually E d is 0 , sorry , this photo chemical reaction process E d is 0 and the other E p and E t remains same .
So , if you put E d is 0 and E t , E t term values from same as earlier , you will get E r is 20 kilo joule per mol .
So , as E X n , which means , that in case of radical polymerization initiated by a photo chemical reaction , again the reaction rate , rate of polymerization increases mildly , in this case with increase in temperature and so does the molecular weight .
Here also , molecular weight increases slightly with increase in the temperature .
However , if you remember , that the in case of temperature effect of photo chemical reaction , which is little more complicated because the initiators , which produces radical photo chemically , they also produce radical at a higher temperature .
So , if you increase , there will be complications of the , which type of initiation is dominating and so this equation will be combination of photochemical reaction and a .
This will be little complicated , but for , simply we can do it at lower temperature , then that thermal decision does not come , does not play effect .
Then these conclusions will be varied , will be varied , that rate of reaction or rate of polymerization slightly increases with increase in temperature and the degrees of polymerization or the molecular weight also increases with increases in the temperature slightly .
Now , remember , we , we got this expression for rate of polymerization , this and in case of thermal initiation as well , this , this expression , this expression we got assuming , that the reaction is at steady state .
We , we applied the steady state approximation to , to find out the concentration of the radical , total radical present .
So , these conclusions we just made the , about the effect of temperature on reaction rate and molecular weight is valid till the steady state is maintained .
Once the steady state is broken , for example , this gel effect , during the gel effect when steady state is broken , then this is not valid , this conclusions is not , are not valid anymore and you know , though the effect of temperature will remain in much more complicated than what we just discussed .
So , we , we also did not consider , that there could be possibility of transfer reaction .
In this case we just talked about the propagation and initiation , propagation and the termination reactions , now there could be transfer reaction , chain transfer reactions as well .
Now , from Mayo equation we have seen how the molecular weight varies with the chain transfer of the polymers where we can write… This is , we have in the last class or the lecture before last one , we had seen , that if there is a chain transfer , then the molecular weight actually drops as the result of chain transfer reaction and this is , this 0 is , this X n bar is the number average degrees of polymerization in absence of any chain transfer reaction .
So , if there is any chain transfer reaction , the actual value of X n bar will come down and C s and other C s , it could be A s , could be a monomer a solvent or a molecule , which are added from outside by deliberately or by , it present as impurities .
And this is , this is , this R stand for transfer constant and are given by the rate constant for the transfer and rate constant for the propagation .
So , we can again write same another equation and write ln C s as similar to the earlier cases .
Now , generally , E , activation energy for transfer is higher than the activation energy for the propagation , which means , with , with increase in temperature C s goes up , the value of C s goes up .
From this expression you can see , you can write the other , similar to other expressions as well , which gives you E transfer s minus E p by RT square from this expression .
You can clearly see , that with increase in temperature , here temperature goes up , this values of transfer coefficient , transfer constant goes up and if this transfer constant goes up , that means , what will happen ?
Molecular weight , molecular weight will further come down .
So , we have , we have seen how you can get quantitatively the average number , average degrees of polymerization in presence of chain transfer reaction and from this expression we have seen , that if we increase the concentration of chain transfer agents the molecular weight goes down .
And if the chain transfer or transfer constant goes up , then also the molecular weight comes down compared to the case where there is no transfer .
Now , C s value , as we seen from the activation energy for transfer reaction and the propagation reaction , that if temperature goes up , C s goes up , which means , X n come down .
So , increase in temperature has to affect increase in temperature by itself even if there was no transfer reaction .
It was decreasing the molecular weight and in places of transfer reaction is further reducing .
So , if you have a transfer reaction going on , then the increase in temperature will affect more , it will decrease the molecular weight more in comparison where there is no transfer reaction going on .
Both the cases , the molecular weight drop , with , with increase in temperature , but if there are transfer reaction going on , then the drop will be much more compared to situation where is , when there is no transfer reaction .
Now , that basically says , now what the effect of temperature on rate of polymerization and , and molecular weight for different radical processes means , different radical processes is initiated by different initiation reaction as and also , in case of the radical reaction where you have chain transfer reactions .
Now , let us talk about thermodynamics of , of radical polymerization .
In fact , this is true for any chain growth polymerizations , so we can generalize this chain growth polymerization .
Now , we have just concluded , that if T goes up , R p goes up , we just concluded in our discussion few minutes back .
It does not mean , that if you increase , keep on increasing the temperature , rate always will go up .
The answer is no because in this case , we have only considered the forward reaction , we are talking about propagation reaction , whereas there could be backward reaction , depropagation reaction as well .
This is k p and this is k dp , depropagation reaction .
Now , we do not consider normally the reverse reaction because the temperature , we do for most of the monomers , the reverse reaction is almost nil , that is why , we always talk about rate of forward reactions .
So , actually the rate of , so net rate of polymerization would be rate of , polymers , propagation minus rate of depropagation .
Now , as I said , that in normal case , whatever temperature we use for most of the polymers , this is 0 .
We consider rate of polymerization as the rate of propagation altogether .
But if you think , to increase the temperature at some temperature the rate of depolymerization will also be insignificant , in those cases we have to consider the rate of depolymerization also .
And if we increase the temperature further , rate of depolymerization also increases , so as rate of polymerization , as we discussed just now .
So , at some temperature , some temperature T , which we call T c , ceiling temperature , ceiling temperature , this R p becomes R dp .
So , basically this propagation and depropagation reaction , they reach in equilibrium .
So , rate of polymerization reaction , propagation reaction is same as rate of depropagation reaction , if I want to show this in , in a figure , what we can , so if this is your rate .
And if this temperature , rate of polymerization or rate of propagation increases with temperature .
Now , at some point of time , some point temperature , rate of depropagation also , this is dp and this is p , is a propagation and this is depropagation also increases .
Now , that point , so net , so net reaction , net polymerization reaction , which is R p net , how it will act , it will look like ?
It will be something like this because below this temperature the rate of polymerization is higher and then the depolymerization becomes significant and at this temperature , which is , t ’ s , T c , the net polymerization is 0 .
That means , if you do not see any change in the concentration of monomer , which means , that no polymerization is taking place .
If you comeback after some time and take the , these are the concentration of the monomer and you see , that the monomer concentration is same as before , which means , that monomer is not , monomer is not participating in further polymerization reaction .
So , that is the time when the quick decision is reached .
Now , let us prove this phenomenal little more .
At T c you have R , R p is same as R d p now r p you know k p M and M dot and this will be M dot .
So , what is the equilibrium constant ?
Equilibrium constant k is k p by k dp is 1 by M at equilibrium now at i write e because this is an equilibrium .
So , I write , substitute e for these all this concentration .
So , at , equilibrium constant is related to the concentration of the monomer in this case only .
Now , this is a special case where you do not see the concentration of product is appearing in your equilibrium constant , it is only the reactants .
In this case , the monomer , which is appearing in the , your equilibrium constant value .
Now , I can write few thermodynamic expressions .
We know del G 0 standard gives energy change for polymerization R T c ln k , where k is the equilibrium constant .
We can write from this R T c ln M e and we can write , del G 0 p as del H 0 p minus T c del S 0 p this side ; right side R T c ln M e .
This as you know , this , this is the standard enthalpy of polymerization reaction and this is standard entropy of the polymerization and this is standard state for monomer is considered .
Standards state for monomers is either pure monomer , pure monomer or 1 molar solution of monomer , whereas for polymer , it is pure amorphous polymer , pure amorphous polymer or slightly crystalline polymer , or , or 1 molar solution of polymer repeat units .
So , what does del H and del S 0 means ?
That you take a pure monomer and convert to pure polymer associated enthalpy , chain , change will give you delta S 0 or you take one molar solution of the monomer and convert it completely into polymer .
Now , the associated enthalpy chains will give you del H 0 and the entropy change will give you the del S 0 of the polymer .
Now , relook at this expression and we can , this expression and let us write from this expression , thus ln M e is del H 0 p by R T c minus del S 0 p by R .
Similarly , we can write , T c is del H 0 p by del S 0 p plus R ln M e .
Now , what does these two expressions says , that T c and M e are related , they are not independent to each other .
If you change T c , if you increase T c , the equilibrium constant , concentration of the free monomer increases and so as the other thing , M e increases , equilibrium constant , concentration of the monomer increases , then T c also increases .
This is a very important thing , that T c is not a single temperature , it , it depends on the composition of your polymerization reaction .
It is not that every polymer has or every monomer has a single ceiling temperature .
This and this often is understood , that T c is the single number , it actually depends on the monomer concentration as well .
Now , how to , how to sort of read these equations ?
Let us understand , every , if you can , you can consider every temperature , you can consider every temperature as , you can consider whatever reaction you are doing as a ceiling temperature .
Now , there is always an associated equilibrium value of the monomer .
If you start a reaction , if you start or if at any point of time in a reaction , if M concentration is or the monomer is higher than equilibrium value , then the reaction will proceed till M becomes M e , then reaction will not take place further ; that means , rate of propagation will be same as depropagation .
So , every temperature , there is associated , for every temperature there is a ceiling temperature , there is associated equilibrium monomer concentration .
So , if you start or anytime during your reaction , if your free monomer concentration is higher than the equilibrium monomer concentration corresponding to tact temperature , your reaction temperature , then what will happen ?
The reaction will continue , propagation will continue till your free monomer concentration becomes as the equilibrium free monomer concentration .
At any point , I say , you start a reaction with your free monomer concentration less than M e , then will what will happen ?
You fix a temperature for your reaction and you start with a monomer concentration , which is lower than your equilibrium monomer concentration , which means , the reaction will not go .
Rather , if the polymer chain can be initiated , polymer chains can be broken at some , some place and you get a radical or some active center , the polymers will depropagate , unzip to form monomers , so that the free monomer concentration goes up and gives you the equilibrium monomer concentration .
And if your , at any point of time if your monomer concentration is equivalent to your equilibrium monomer concentrate , then the reaction will stop , that means , that there will be no appreciable or there is no change in the concentration of the free monomers .
So , apparently , there is no reaction going on .
Actually , there is a rate of propagation is same as rate of depropagation .
So , again , one more time let me emphasize , that if you , every temperature , every , your reaction , you can choose any temperature of your reaction and consider that as a ceiling temperature .
Now , that temperature corresponds to an equilibrium value of the free monomer determined by the values of del H 0 and del S 0 .
Depending upon this value you get the relation between T c and M e .
So , for every temperature there is a M e value and if your , at any point of term your reaction concentration , the free , free monomer or the concentration of your free monomer is higher than the equilibrium monomer concentration , reaction will proceed till the reaction , the mono , free monomer concentration is same as the equilibrium monomer concentration .
Let us take an example .
Now , for temperature 298 K or 25 degree centigrade , what is the M e for different monomers ?
Now , M e you can get , again T is given , T c is given , so that is your temperature reaction .
You can get it from the values of del 0 p and del S p .
If you know these , this R you know and your reaction temperature you know , then you will get this value of the free monomer concentration at equilibrium .
So , that is , let us , vinyl acetate , 1 into 10 to power minus 9 moles per liter ; methyl acrylate , moles per liter ; methyl metacrylate ; styrene , moles per liter and alpha methyl styrene , 2.2 moles per liter .
So , if you can carry out a polymerization reaction of these monomers at 25 degree centigrade , the reaction will stop or in accurate sense , reaction will be equilibrium till your monomer concentrations comes down to this level .
See , if you start with the pure methyl meta acrylate and do the reactions at 298 degree centigrade , 298 K , at 25 degree centigrade and reaction will proceed , polymerization will proceed till the free concentration or the concentration of the free monomer becomes 10 to the power minus 3 moles per liter , which also means , that you can never complete a reaction , you can never complete 100 percent , entire methyl meta acrylate to the polymer stage because before that there will be stage where equilibrium , where for any temperature where the propagation step and depropagation step are same .
Now , look at the values of alpha methyl styrene , that is , 2.2 moles per liter .
Now , the pure , the concentration of pure alpha methyl styrene comes about 7.7 moles per liter .
So , these monomers will polymerize at 25 degree centigrade .
If you can , of course , 25 degree cannot polymerize because you have to generate , that is very difficult , you have to increase the temperature for the reasons you know .
If you can start a polymer or you can polymerize alpha methyl styrene at 25 degree centigrade , then the polymerization will take place till the concentration becomes 2.2 moles per liter .
Once it reaches this value , it will not proceed .
Now , it will be interesting to see what is the value for T c when you start with the pure monomer .
That is interesting because if you start with the pure monomer and if your T c is your reaction temperature , then the equilibrium value of your free monomer is same as the pure monomer .
That means , reaction will not at all proceed .
Now , let us put this number for the same , same monomers , the t c values .
Let me cut this and put this , this is value for equilibrium concentration of the free monomer , at , which is pure monomer .
So , what will be the T c ?
For styrene it is 310 degree centigrade , for alpha methane styrene is 61 degree centigrade , for styrene is 220 degree centigrade , what does it mean ?
If you start a reaction of alpha methyl styrene from pure monomer at 61 degree centigrade , what will happen ?
These are already reached , pure monomer is equilibrium .
So , that means , it has already reached the equilibrium , then it will be never polymerized further .
If you do it at lower temperature , then M e value will come down and reaction will proceed till that equilibrium value of the monomer concentration .
If you do above 61 degree , the M e value is even higher than the pure monomer , which means , again there is no polymerization possible .
I hope you got this concept of this ceiling temperature and how does it influence you polymerization process .
So , again , every temperature you can consider as ceiling temperature .
Normally , you do reaction little at a higher temperature for , say , at 80 degree or 100 .
Now , if you do at 80 degree , then you can only reach polymerization .
You can carry out the polymerization till the free monomer concentration reaches the equilibrium value of the temperature and because these numbers are low , 10 to power minus 9 , 10 to power minus 6 and minus 3 , which is considered , say , 25 five degree centigrade .
Now , if we increase , say , around this 25 degree centigrade , say 50 degree or say 100 degree , it will come down little bit , go up little bit even though the numbers will be very low , which means , if you do it at 100 centigrade , you almost quantitatively convert the monomers .
But there will be always some free monomer remaining , which is equal to the free monomer concentration at equilibrium for that particular temperature .
Now , how do you get the values of T c ?
Now , we know that again from that expression .
We just talked about plus R ln M e , how do you get the relations between T c and M e ?
If we know the reaction , the values of delta H p and delta S p , now what is delta S p sign ?
Del H is negative because it is an exothermic reaction , pi bond is converting to a sigma bond and del S is also less than 0 because the monomers is getting tied up into a more ordered state compared to a disorder state .
So , if we , we can plot M versus e versus 1 over T c and from the slope we can , if you know this , by experimental process we can get this values from the slope and interest rate is , so if we know these values we can get the value for del S and del H .
And reverse history , if we know the values of del S and del H , we can find out the relation between the M e and T c .
Now , each point , each point in this represents a particular T c and corresponding M e value , which means , that T c is not a singular number , it varies along with your free monomer concentration .
Now , how does these numbers , del H and del S , vary with different monomer ?
Now , del S is , del H we know is basically the difference in the activation for the propagation reaction and the depropagation reaction .
So , if I plot , say , energy and this , your monomer and this is your polymer , so this difference is your del H .
So , anything , anything , which stabilizes this energy , the monomer energy will decrease the difference and over anything , which actually increases the energy of the polymer , the produce or resulting polymer , it also will reduce your magnitude of del H .
Now , so anything , if monomer is stabilized , then del H , magnitude of del H will come down .
Now , this stabilization could be due to resonance in the active effect or hyper conjugation or even by inter - monomer association or inter - polymer association and if the polymer is strained , then also this goes up , del H comes down .
So , that will depend on the structure of the monomers and we will talk about that more in next lecture .
Now , what about del S ?
Del S is basically difference between your translational , rotational and vibrational entropy of monomer and polymer .
Now , whatever vibrational , rotational entropy is lost by the monomers is actually gained by the polymer .
So , it is basically the entropy , the delay value is basically the entropy of change in , entropy of the translational , entropy of the monomers resulting in a polymer .
Now , this translational entropy does not depend too much on the monomers structure .
So , we will find that the delays values are more or less independent or every monomer in this chain polymerization .
So , we will start next lecture from this , this page and talk about more on the values of del H and del S and how a monomer structure actually determine or influence the value of del H , and which in turn determine the thermodynamic feasibility of polymerization of a monomer .
So , we will start from this page in the next lecture .
Continuing from the previous lecture on kinetics of bi - substrate enzyme catalyzed reactions we will be talking about the application of King Altman method to derive rate expression for some of the complex enzyme reaction mechanisms that we often encounter in the bi - substrate reactions .
The second thing after getting the rate expression for those different mechanisms of the bi - substrate enzyme catalyzed reactions is the procedures by which one can discriminate between different mechanisms .
That is for a particular enzyme catalyzed reaction how to identify the reaction mechanism it follows ?
We will be following general principles about that .
Coming first to the application of King Altman method I will try to illustrate it with a simple bi intermediate reaction sequence .
It is not bi - substrate but a single substrate .
This is just to illustrate the point so that the system does not become complex immediately and we will be able to appreciate .
Let us assume that the reaction follows the type of mechanism as indicated here k1 k2 k3 E + S ES ET E + P k - 1 k - 2 k - 3 It is a totally reversible reaction and you have the rate constant k1 , k - 1 , k2 , k - 2 , k3 , k - 3 .
As I mentioned that the first step in any reaction mechanism would be to express a mechanism in cyclic form so that each of the enzyme species that are present , here as you see there are three enzyme species , E , ES and ET they must form the vertices of the polygon that represents the reaction mechanism .
So you can just write E .
It will form a triangle and E to ES , ES to ET and then ET to E .
Also show the interaction between the three enzyme species that are present .
Mention the rate constant in the form of Kappa values .
That means Kappa value for E to ES will be k1.S and this will be k - 1and you will notice that wherever a substrate or product species is involved you will multiply the rate constant with that .
If there is no substrate or product then the rate constant will be as it is .
Similarly in the case of ES it will be k2.k - 2 .
Here you will have k3 and k - 3.p .
With this information that is available from the reaction mechanism then we will try to find out the fraction of each of the enzyme species of the total enzyme concentration in the form of the rate constant and the total enzyme concentration .
If you consider the first enzyme species let us say E we write down all the possible patterns which contain n - 1 terms where n is the number of enzyme species .
For example here the enzyme species are three so we will take all patterns that have two steps only two steps and nothing else and those patterns will be considered .
Second thing is that only those patterns which end up in synthesis of that species and not the patterns that lead to the break down or which go away from the species will be considered .
For example in this case since all the steps are reversible there will be three patterns .
You will notice that you have k - 1 and k3 .
You have k - 1 , k - 2 and also k2 , k3 .
The fraction of this , the total enzyme concentration will be proportional to sum of the product of the Kappa factors .
That means E upon E0 will be equal to k - 1.k3 + k - 1.k - 2 + k2.k3 E / E0 = ?
? is the sum total of all the Kappa factors .
That means all the Kappa factors put together for E , ES and ET .
The numerator whatever we will write for ES and ET will also be added in the denominator so the sigma will be E0 .
The concentration of E species will be a fraction which will be given by such an expression .
Sigma is the sum total of the products of all the Kappa factors .
For example we have the products of Kappa factor for E we will have for ES and also for ET .
The total sum will be the sigma on the denominator .
So that will represent the E0 or you can write E will be equal to E0 multiplied by the terms in the numerator .
Similarly you can write for ES .
The ES will be given by again three different patterns .
This one here it is k1s and k - 2 , k - 2.k - 3p and k1s and k3 .
Here also you will notice that the concentration of E will be E = E0 ( k1.k - 2s + k - 2.k - 3p + k1.k3s ) In the same fashion for ET it will come out to be k - 3.p and k2 , k1s.k2 and k - 1 .
k - 3.p and the fraction of the ET of the total enzyme concentration will be E0 ( k2.k - 3p + k1.k2s + k - 1.k - 3.p ) Now you can write the reaction velocity .
The reaction velocity for such a reaction will be given by v = k3 ( ET ) – k - 3 [ E ] .
[ P ] The rate expression for that will be this expression .
You can substitute the value of ET and E in the expression and after deleting all the factors which are positive and negative you come up with E0 ( k1k2k3s - k - 1k - 2k - 3p ) v = ( k - 1 k - 2 + k2 k3 + k - 1 k3 ) + s ( k1 k - 2 + k1 k3 + k1 k2 ) + p ( k - 2 k - 3 + k2k - 3 + k - 1 k - 3 ) This comes out to be the rate expression for such a reaction mechanism .
Had this reaction not been reversible totally then the term p will become zero , irreversible reaction .
You can just put p equal to zero that means this term will disappear whole of this term will disappear and the rate expression will become for a irreversible reaction step .
So these are the steps .
Just to summarize first of all you write the reaction mechanism in a cyclic manner , write all the Kappa values at each of the inter conversion arrows of the different enzyme species express the fraction of the concentration of a particular enzyme species of the total enzyme concentration in terms of the sum of the products of the Kappa factors and then write the rate expression taking the value of the particular enzyme species from those expression .
So that is what we do and one can write rate expression for a complex reaction mechanism .
The denominator is total sum of all the Kappa factors of all the three species and because here all the three enzyme species are convertible reversibly all the patterns are coming into picture .
But if in a reaction mechanism some of the steps or some of the inter conversions are irreversible in nature then many of the patterns will disappear because there will be no chance of synthesizing that particular species .
But we will consider only those patterns which will consist of n - 1 steps .
With this background if we take a general case from a binary substrate reaction that is particularly for the ordered ternary complex formation you will recall that the reaction mechanism in this case was expressed E goes to EA then EA goes to EAB .
Mind it the reaction binding of B from E is not possible in the ordered mechanism .
We are considering that only A can bind to free enzyme and then this goes to EY with the release of the product X and this goes to E with the release of the product Y .
Let us say this is k1s , k - 1 .
I am just writing the Kappa values right on the arrow so that while writing the rate expression it will be easier .
This is your k2B , k - 2 , this is k3 , and this is k4 .
There are four different enzyme species E , EA , EAB and EY .
The last two steps are irreversible in nature .
They only lead to formation of the two products in a sequential manner .
If we write for E there should be three different possibilities .
One is that the E can synthesized in this route that is your k - 1 , k - 2 and k4 .
The other is this can also be synthesized in this form k2B , k3 and k4 and also k - 1 , k3 , k4 .
These are the three possible patterns which are possible and so writing for the concentration of E will be E0 ( k - 1 k - 2 k4 + k2 k3 k4 B + k - 1 k3 k4 ) E = ?
The concentration of E will be given by this factor .
EA will be formed only by two patterns that is k1A , k - 2 and k4 and k1A , k3 and k4 .
These are the only two patterns which will lead to synthesis of EA and none another because in all other patterns there will be no reversible step .
I again like to remind you that just as a matter of convenience we consider only those steps which lead to the synthesis of EA .
All the steps which go outside from the EA I am not taking into account .
The concentration of EA will be given by E0 ( k1 k - 2 k4 A + k1k3 k4 A ) EA = ?
EAB will have only one pattern possible because EAB is emerging only from the E side via E and EA and it cannot come from EY .
So you have only one pattern for EAB that is k1A , k2B and k4 .
Therefore EAB will be given by E0 ( k1 k2 k4 A B ) EAB = ?
Similarly EY will also have only one pattern k1A k2B and k3 .
So this will be given by E0 ( k1k2k3 A.B ) EY = ?
So you have now the relative concentrations or the relative fractions of each of the enzyme species that are present .
You recall that in the case of allosteric enzymes also the relative concentration can be arrived from a similar analysis to have the concentration of each of the enzyme species .
From this then you can write down rate of reaction as equal to v = k3 [ EAB ] If you look at the original rate expression the product is being formed .
You may have either as k4.EY or you can have k3.EAB .
Both the reaction rates will be identical and so you can write as k3.EAB .
Right in the main reaction mechanism we are writing A plus B going to X and Y .
We are considering a unimolecular reaction .
If they are not unimolecular then rates will be different .
But as long as we are assuming that the stoichiometric relationship is unimolecular they will be identical .
If you substitute the value of EAB you get E0 k1k3k2k4 A.B ?
? is the total sum of all the numerators of earlier species and if you simplify that just by arithmetic manipulation you get an expression like { K3k4 / k3 + k4 } E0.A.B v = k4 ( k - 1k - 2 + k - 1 k3 ) + k4 ( k - 2 + k3 ) A + k3 k4 B + A.B k1k2 ( k3 + k4 ) k2 ( k3 + k4 ) k1 ( k3 + k4 ) We have rearranged it into the format of the general rate expression and in the form of individual rate constant and this term on the numerator indicate the value of Vm .
This term is k ’ AkB .
This is your kB and this is your kA .
From this again by dividing this term you can get the value of k ’ A .
This is identical to the generalized rate expression proposed by Alberty .
You can get the individual rate constant in the form of the four parameters that we talked about Vm , k ’ A , kA and kB which represents the kinetic parameters .
In the case of Thorell and Chance mechanism which we consider as a special case of the ordered ternary complex formation we assumed that the complex EAB was very unstable as if the EA directly goes into EY forming a product X and there is no significant concentration of EAB present .
This indicates that in the case of Thorell and Chance mechanism k3 term from the reaction mechanism is much , much greater than k - 2 .
The condition implying the non - existence of the term , in significant quantities of EAB and direct conversion of EA into EY although it is via EAB , the complex EAB being not very stable , means that k3 is much , much greater than k2 .
When you substitute those you get a rate expression as k3.E0.A.B v = k - 1k3 / k1k2 + k3 / k1 B + k3 / k2 A + A.B Again the same pattern of generalized rate expression that we noticed in the case of ternary complex formation and both the type of ternary complex formation will follow the same pattern .
When we talk about the binary complex formation , in the case of ping pong mechanism the pattern will change and that will clearly indicate the existence of a different mechanism .
You can further simplify this by multiplying this by k1 , k2 .
k1k2k3.E0.A.B v = k - 1k3 + k2k 3 B + k1k3 A + A.B That is the final expression for Thorell and Chance mechanism and therefore one can go into such a mechanism and get rate expression .
The practical utility is two things .
One is to understand the reaction mechanism that a particular reaction follows and second thing is design of reactors .
You read the kinetic rate expression and the individual rate constants if you want to really design and get the final simulated values and all other simulated profiles for the reactor performance .
The significance of the kinetic studies allows you to understand the reaction mechanism .
By getting their individual rate constants you can also manipulate them for the design of reactors and for simulation work .
The information on the individual rate constant will also give you an understanding on how the enzymes will function at the metabolic level .
A simple example is glycolytic enzymes for example hexokinase .
The glucose can enter into more than one metabolic pathway .
Which metabolic pathway it will enter requires understanding of the reaction mechanism and individual rate constants .
It is significant to note that most of the enzymes that are present in the living cells are bi - substrate reactions .
Bi - substrate reactions can be understood and for the sake of simplicity have been analyzed keeping in view the Michaelis–Menten kinetics .
But always it may not apply because the concentration of the second substrate will never be in excess in the living cell .
That will always be in comparable concentration and therefore it will be always useful to have understanding of the mechanism .
The other bi - substrate reaction mechanism was a binary complex formation and the case which we talked about was Ping Pong mechanism which states that at no state ternary complex forms .
As soon as the binary complex forms a product is released and the modified enzyme then interacts with the second substrate and the second product is formed .
The reaction mechanism as we have expressed earlier is k1A , k - 1 , EA .
Here at this stage a modified enzyme complex and product X will be released with k2 , k3B and you get E ’ B .
You again get another product form y and with the k4 rate constant .
There is only one reversible step here when the first substrate binds to enzyme rest of the steps are irreversible steps .
The four different enzyme species present here E , E ’ A , E ’ and E ’ B .
For E you can write the pattern as k - 1 , k3B and k4 .
Similarly you have another pattern k2 , k3B and k4 and the relative concentration of the enzyme species E will be E0 ( k - 1k3k4B + k2k3k4B ) ?
Similarly for EA you will get only one pattern which will be feasible that is you are going in the anti - clockwise fashion that is your k3B , k4 and k1.A and the relative concentration will be E0 ( k1k3k4 B.A ) ?
For E ’ you again have only one pattern that is k2 , k1A and k4 and that will be E0 ( k1k2k4 A ) ?
E ’ B will also have only one pattern k1A , k2 , k3B and you will get E0 ( k1k2k3 A.B ) ?
So having the relative concentration of each of the enzyme species then you can always write the rate expression that is your v as equal to v = k4.E ’ B = k2.EA It can be either k4.E ’ B or it can be k2.EA .
Either of that can be written .
Therefore again you can substitute the values and get reaction velocity expression as E0 k1k2 k3 k4 .
A . B v = k1k2k4.A + k3k4 ( k - 1 + k2 ) .B + k1k3 ( k2 + k4 ) A.B If you try to bring it in the form of generalized rate expression you get k2k4 / ( k2 + k4 ) .
E0.A.B k2k4 A + k4 ( k - 1 + k2 ) B + A.B k3 ( k2 + k4 ) k1 ( k2 + k4 ) You notice a significant difference from the generalized rate expression .
You have the Vm term , you have the kB term and you have kA term .
But the k ’ A.kB term is missing which implies in the case of pong ping pong reaction mechanism , the term k ’ A is zero and that makes a very big point to discriminate between the different reaction mechanisms .
At least you can distinguish whether the enzyme reaction follows the binary complex mechanism or ternary complex mechanism by just evaluating the value of k ’ A .
Earlier we talked about the analysis of the bi - substrate data based on the double reciprocal plot and the secondary plots of the slope and intercepts .
If you plot 1 / A and 1 / v you get a profile like this with B varying and if you plot slope vs 1 / v and similarly intercept versus 1 / v you can determine the value of kA , kB , k ’ A and Vm .
By analyzing these parameters one can distinguish if the magnitude of k ’ A is zero and one can conclude that the reaction mechanism under study follows the binary reaction mechanism .
That means that the dissociation of that , that is the break down of the EA complex is very , very slow .
Zero means the magnitude goes to a very small value .
It becomes a very stable system .
The second part of today ’ s lecture is to discriminate between the different reaction mechanisms .
One of the tools we have got is the analysis of the reaction rate data based on double reciprocal plot .
We can easily distinguish and get the magnitudes of the values of the various kinetics parameters Vm , kA , kB and k ’ A and if the magnitude of k ’ A is negligible or zero one can conclude that it is binary reaction mechanism and not ternary .
Unfortunately this analysis will not yield any information about whether it is an ordered or a random ternary complex formation mechanism because in both cases the rate pattern will be identical although the magnitude of the kA , kB and k ’ A might vary but they may have a positive value .
In those cases another factor which we make use often for analyzing the reaction mechanism is the enzyme inhibition data .
Because if you study the use of one of the products of these bi - substrate reaction as an inhibitor and see their interaction with the effect on the rate expression you will notice that the different products X or Y when used as an inhibitor they give rise to different pattern of inhibition , which we noted earlier .
That means un - competitive , non - competitive or a linear mix and the linear mix was a case of non - competitive inhibition .
I will not go into detailed analysis of those because they will only have very long expressions .
But if you consider the summary of the rate equations , I summarized here the random ternary complex formation .
It is exactly identical to that of a generalized rate expression ordered ternary complex that we have written today and Thorell and Chance mechanism and Ping pong mechanism and the species in the brackets are the ones that correspond to that enzyme species .
For studying the inhibition pattern of each of the product used as an inhibitor let us consider a compulsory order ternary complex formation in which the substrate A binds first .
Use the two products Y or X separately as inhibitors in the reaction and notice the effect of Y and X as the nature of inhibition .
With respect to the varying A you get a competitive inhibition pattern .
With respect to X as the inhibitor you get a mixed inhibition .
You get a completely different pattern and as you recall that when we discussed the inhibition patterns we also mentioned very clearly that major use of the inhibition patterns is in the analyses of the bi - substrate reactions to identify their reaction mechanism .
One can derive these expressions and get the different types of inhibition pattern .
This is just a summary of the whole thing .
When you take A binding first , you know the product and out of the two as an inhibitor you get a different pattern and with respect to varying B you get a different pattern .
So by getting the inhibition data on the bi - substrate reaction kinetics either by choosing one product or the other product one can get a set of data and from which one can conclude by the ordered ternary complex formation or a random ternary complex formation Identifying Ping - pong bi - bi or the ping pong mechanism directly from the effect of substrate concentration on the reaction rate itself can lead you to that kind of scenario .
The combination of the two studies particularly the effect of substrate concentration and studying the nature of inhibition with respect to one or more of the products will give you the nature of inhibition pattern and that information can give you a conclusion about the nature of the reaction mechanism .
Most of the reactions that lead to such kind of inhibition patterns have been then concluded to follow one or the other ordered or ternary complex mechanism formation .
With this we will be completing our kinetics of enzyme catalyzed reaction .
Just to summarize what we have covered so far in the kinetics we have initially looked at single substrate single intermediate reactions leading to hyperbolic kinetics and the validity of this kinetic pattern to a whole range of reactions under different conditions .
Thirdly we came to inhibition patterns with respect to the single substrate reactions and the effect on the inhibitor concentration on the reaction rate and also the effect of activators on the reaction rate .
Then we came to the effect of pH and effect of temperature .
They are used for understanding reaction thermodynamic parameters and other mechanistic aspects .
Then we came to bi - substrate reactions and the effect of substrate concentration , writing the rate expression and finally concluding with the discrimination of various reaction mechanisms that are involved in bi - substrate reactions .
That summarizes the whole of whatever we have covered in enzyme kinetics .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
In the last lecture we have started our discussion on polymer molecular determination , and we actually discussed how to get the viscosity average molecular weight .
Now , in this lecture we will start discussing about techniques which will enable us to get the number average molecular weight .
We will discuss the techniques like membrane osmometry , vapor pressure osmometry , and end group analysis .
And then following this discussion on how to get number average molecular weight , we will start discussion on determination of weight average molecular weight by light scattering .
This discussion may not end ; this lecture we will continue in the following lecture .
Let us start with membrane osmometry .
You know all of us know about colligative properties you know from our physical chemistry knowledge ’ s .
Colligative properties are those properties of a solution which depends only on the number of solute molecules , provided the solute molecules are nonvolatile and we are doing the measurements at very dilute solutions .
These properties are called colligative properties and we know that there are four colligative properties ; osmotic pressure of the solution , lowering of solvent vapor pressure , elevation of solvent boiling point , and depression of solvent freezing point .
We will discuss the osmotic pressure method in detail following by brief discussion on solvent vapor pressure lowering method and we will just mention about the third and fourth properties .
Let us start with membrane osmometry .
You know what happened in membrane osmometry ?
You have a solution in this case polymer solution and the solvent for the solution separated by a membrane which is permeable only to the solvent not the solute .
So , solvent can go from solvent side to the solution sides not the solute molecules .
Now this case arises ; the osmotic pressure difference between the two sides and the solvent because of the chemical potential difference .
The chemical potential of solvent molecule in this side is higher than the chemical potential of the solvent in this side which makes solvents to move from solvent side to solution sides and thus increasing the pressure .
If you have a capillary , then there will be rise in the height of the capillary and this will continue till this additional pressure compensate or increases the chemical potential volume of the solvent this side equals to such a extent that it becomes equals to the chemical potential of the solvent in this side .
Similarly you can design another equipment where you have a polymer solutions in this capillary and which is separated by a semipermeable membrane which is only permeable to the solvent molecules .
And as osmosis , the pressure of the polymer solution side goes up and this excess pressure here ; this excess pressure and this residue are called the osmotic pressure .
Now as we discussing that this side the solvent chemical potential is higher for a pure solvent than in polymer solution .
So , the osmosis happens .
Now so mu if we write 1 for the solvent molecule and this superscript of 0 having for pure solvent at say , original pressure P will be equal to the chemical potential of the solvent where the pressure is increased from P to P plus pi where pi is the osmotic pressure .
So , this is the condition from condition for the equilibrium between the solution side and the solvent side and the solution side .
So , I can write this and breakdowns this mathematically and just write this one ; remember 1 for the solvent and we generally write 2 for the solute molecules .
Solute in this case it is the polymer .
So , we can rearrange this .
Now pi is very small .
So , we can just remove the pressure terms from the bracket and we can write from the definition of mu pi we can write using the help of the partial differential .
This is nothing but this is the osmotic pressure which we can detect through our measurement and this is the partial molar volume of the solvent and for a very dilute solution which is our working condition .
This partial molar volume can be replaced by just molar volume of the solvent .
Now this term we have already determined this term from Flory - Huggins equation in our earlier lecture and this is equivalent to if you can recollect from your knowledge .
This term mu 1 minus mu 1 0 is minus RT phi 2 x ; phi 2 is the volume fraction of the solvent molecules , x is the number of segment of the polymer molecules and so on .
So if you compare these two expressions , the one we already wrote in this page and the expressions which we know from Flory - Huggins equation we can write pi is RT .
So , for dilute solution it can be mathematically shown that we can write the above expression like this where chi as you know chi is the solvent - solute interaction parameter , rho 2 is the density of the polymer molecule , M n is the number average molecular weight This c is the concentration , concentration in mass per unit volume .
So , c is concentration mass per unit volume .
Now as we know that this expression the Flory - Huggins expression , this is from Flory - Huggins theory , Flory - Huggins theory is not applicable for dilute solutions ; we can write this expression as instead of this we can write this expression like earlier cases , we can write this as a variant expression .
So , instead of like this we can write A 2 c plus A 3 c square like this where A 2 is nothing but this term .
So , this term this term is nothing but A 2 .
So , this is the expression we can utilize to get the number average molecular weight of a polymer from dilute polymer solution .
So , what we need to do ?
We need to make few polymer solutions dilute .
So , we can make few dilute polymer solutions having different concentration and then measure pi of each of this solutions and then plot pi c versus c which may be something like this .
And then extra plot this value to c equals to 0 .
So , this intercept is nothing but pi by c at c is equal to 0 .
This is from this expression this will be RT by M n and the slope will give the value for the second period coefficient from which we can get the value for polymer solvent interaction parameter chi .
Now in terms of experiment , what are the things we should remember ; one is that temperature control has to be very precise because osmotic pressure is very much dependent on temperature .
So , it has to be very much controlled and we have to keep all this polymer solutions sufficiently dilute .
So , that typically we get or we make solutions having concentration having less than 20 gram per liter .
Typically we make concentrations 20 gram so that equations are valid .
If the solvent becomes good , then the term A 3 in the expression ; if the solvent becomes sufficiently good then this term may become significant which means c square terms may also contribute and if A 3 becomes significant then c square terms contribute .
And if the polymer solvent system is theta solvent for that particular temperature at temperature of experiment , then A 2 , A 3 this will all become 0 which means it will be the osmotic pressure by c will be concentration independent .
This is what happened .
For example if we have , for polymethyl methacrylate PMMA toluene is very good solvent .
So , we start to get contribution from the A 3 term or c squared term .
So , the curve deviates from linearity at high concentration .
This is what happened for acetone and acetonitrile is a theta solvent for the temperature where this temperature for PMMA which means the pi by c will be independent of the concentration of the solution .
So by this way , we can get the number average molecular weight .
We can also determine A 2 by plotting or getting or determining A 2 at different temperature ; with this expression from the slope we can get A 2 .
So , from the slope we can A 2 as we can see from this expression and if we measure or if we determine A 2 at different temperature and then plot A 2 versus T and then the temperature for which A 2 is 0 ; the temperature for which A 2 is 0 that would be the theta temperature .
So , this is one way we can determine the theta temperature .
What are the considerations we must do as we can see that we do not require any calibration for this method ?
So , osmotic membrane osmometry is an absolute method .
So , you do not need any calibration .
So , if you make a new polymer you can get the molecular weight number average molecular weight from first principle .
You do not need any calibration .
Now to make the experiment short , this equilibration between the solvent side and solute side must be fast .
So , equilibrium equilibration time must be short which can be done either by small cell volume or by high membrane surface area .
We also need very highly pressure sensitive equipment because the osmotic value of osmotic pressure is quite low so that we can accurately determine the osmotic pressure .
And as we can see that for a given concentration of solution if we increase the molecular weight , the number of molecules goes down .
So , for a given concentration if we increase molecular weight , the number of molecules goes down so as osmotic pressure .
This method is not very capable of measuring the number average molecular weight for very high molecular weight .
It can determine typically up to 10 to the power 5 to 10 to the power 6 mole per inverse molecular weight .
It cannot determine more than that because if we increase weight further , then the osmotic pressure becomes very small .
The lower cutoff for this method is determined by the cutoff of the membrane which is used because if the membrane has a higher cutoff , then the polymers chains which have smaller M n that will pass through the membrane to the solvent side and then it will contribute in the osmotic pressure .
So , we must be very careful that the samples which we are determining the M n must be the weight of very small molecular weights .
Otherwise those molecular weights will not contribute in the osmotic pressure and hence the determined M n number average molecular weight .
So typically , if a polymer sample has quite a few fraction of low molecular weights which are below the cutoff of the membrane , then the M n or the number average molecular weight determined by this method typically becomes little lower estimated .
So , these are the criteria ’ s or these are parameters we must remember while determining molecular weight by this method .
Let us move on and try out ; some other points which we must just to add some more points in this membrane osmometry that the membranes are different for different solvent .
For organic solvents it could be cellulose or gel cellophane ; aqueous we can use cellulose acetate , nitrocellulose and if you have a corrosive solution , then we can use glass membranes .
Membranes porosity and this situation must be considered because that will determine the lower cutoff and its surface area also continued to the time it requires for equilibration .
And typically membranes are supplied in a in a wet conditions in a particular solvent like isopropanol .
So , if the solvent you have in your hand is dried - out , then this nature might go bad .
So , you should not use that and wet membranes when they are used for the experiment they have to first the solvent has to change gradually so that they are wet .
When we may start the experiment they are wet with the solvent which of our interest .
With this let us move on the next technique of determining the number average molecular weight , vapor pressure osmometry .
In this method these are the two thermistors which are kept for determining temperature difference as low as 10 to the power minus 4 Kelvin .
They are placed in a sealed thermostated chamber which is saturated with the solvent vapor .
Now in these conditions , one with a syringe in one thermistor one solvent drop is placed ; in another thermistor or solution polymer solution drop is placed .
Now a solution in the solvent , chemical potential is lower than in the solvent so the vapor pressure of the solvent in the polymer solution will lower .
And as a result the solvent vapor will condense on this thermistor and the heat of condensation will increase the temperature of this thermistor and equilibrium should arise where the vapor pressure of the solvent in this elevated temperature is same as the vapor pressure of the pure solvent in the temperature of the thermostat .
So , basically we started with a VPO vapor pressure osmometry .
We started , say , with T initial which is the thermostated the temperature for the thermostated chamber which is filled up with solvent vapor and we add one drop of solution in one thermsitor and one drop of solvent in the other thermistor .
So , the vapor pressure will lower and we can write if P 1 is the vapor pressure of the solvent in the final temperature ; the elevated temperature because of the condensation of the vapor solvent vapor from vapor phase to the solution phase which will be equal at the initial vapor pressure So , that is the equilibrium condition when the condensation stops .
Remember this is the P 1 is to present the vapor pressure of the solvent in polymer solution if this elevated temperature whereas P 1 0 is the vapor pressure of the pure solvent at the original temperature .
Now we can apply Clausius - Clapeyron equation and write del P del T is del H vaporization by T V m ; V m is molar volume and if you consider the vapor is the ideal gas , considering the ideal gas vapor we can do few mathematical steps to write .
This delta T is the temperature difference from the final to initial .
At T e represents at equilibrium .
So , while deducing consider that the vapor phase V f as a ideal gas .
Now because T f is very close to T I , we can simply write this expression at P 1 by P 1 0 as minus del H vaporization delta T e by R T i square .
Now this term is nothing but ln activity of the solvent .
Now from thermodynamics we can write the mu 1 as mu 1 by mu 1 0 by RT ; you know this is 40 i .
So , we are not writing T i T i .
So , these are all T i initial thermostat temperature of the medium .
So , if you do not mention T i nor if you just write T then ; that means , it is the initial temperature of the thermostated chamber .
Now Flory - Huggins equation we can write mu i by mu 0 as earlier case we have seen from the osmotic pressure experiment we can simply write this .
So , from there we can write that .
So , if you start from this expression we can write RT ln this side the left hand side .
So , we can write like this RT .
So , if you compare the earlier equation and the osmotic pressure the derivation we did for osmotic pressure , we can simply write this part as minus V 1 , see V 1 is the molar volume of the solvent , 1 by M n minus del H vaporization delta T e ; so delta T e by C K e 1 by M n .
So basically if we can get the delta e , now we can apply the same similar experimental procedure ; like osmotic pressure measurement we can make five different or few different dilute solutions of different concentration and measure the delta T e and then plot delta T e by C with concentration to get K e by M n and A 2 .
In practice , we actually do not reach to the equilibrium because some of heats of the condensation of the droplets , I should get dissipated on thermistor and the solvent stream .
So , what we reach is not a true equilibrium ; it is a steady state .
So , we need to calibrate the experiment with the known molecular weight polymer solutions to actually determine the number average molecular for the unknown samples .
So , this is not an absolute method ; we need calibration .
So , actually what we plot is delta s by C versus C ; delta T s is the steady state temperature difference as steady state which again is measured by the difference in the resistance between the two thermistors versus C .
So finally , delta R s by C at C is equal to 0 will give you the K R s which is this K for the resistance by M n .
So , we know this .
So , we can get the molecular weight M n for the unknown sample .
This is very useful method for low molecular weight samples because if we go for high molecular weight then the increase in the temperature is very low .
So , we do not have the techniques to determine so much , so low temperature difference between thermistors .
Typically we can go up to 10 to the power difference of temperature between the two thermistor as low as 10 to the power 4 Kelvin which translate to upper limit of the upper limit of the molecular weight M n , upper limit of M n approximately 10 to the power 4 order gram per mol .
This is the upper limit of this .
So , if you can get more sophisticated instrument which can detect the temperature difference even lower than this , then you can increase the upper limit of the molecular weight determination in this technique .
Now similar techniques similar methods can be applied to the other two methods like other two colligative properties ; for example this similarly the same logic can be applied or same principle can be applied to other two methods like ebulliometry which deals with the elevation of boiling point ; boiling point elevation of boiling point where delta T e is T b minus T 0 where T b is the boiling point of the solution and T 0 is the boiling point of the pure solvent .
Here we require the value for delta H molar heat of vaporization and with the help of cryoscopy which deals with the depression of freezing point where we can get the same T 0 T f ; T 0 is the freezing point of the solvent , T f is the freezing point of the solution where we need the molar enthalpy of freezing or melting .
But these are techniques and not used much ; nowadays these techniques are not used much for several reasons though mainly this techniques like osmotic membrane osmometry and vapor pressure osmometry are used and as we have discussed that they are complimentary to each other where membrane osmometry can determine molecular weight , number of molecular weight for little higher range and vapor pressure osmometry can be used for determining molecular rates of low molecular weights of lower range .
Let us have brief discussion about the third technique which is end group determination .
By determining the end group quantitatively , we can also determine the molecular weight ; quantitative determination of end group gives M n number average molecular weight .
The requirements are that basically we will be able to quantitatively determination of end groups of the polymer .
So , polymers must have amenable end groups which can be analyzed by say titrometry or spectophotometrically and concentration must be high enough , so that we can determine the concentration of end group accurately or quantitatively , and the other group presence in the polymer should not interfere in the determination of the end groups of our interest .
Secondly , we must know the number of end groups per polymer chain .
So , each polymer chain how many per polymer chain .
So , how many chains they have .
So , if you have like typically in a linear polymer we have two ends and if they hit the branch and it has three ends , then obviously we must know that this case the sample has two chain ends end groups and this case the sample has three end groups ; otherwise the analysis will be erratic with error in the values .
Typically this method is applied to step - growth polymers because we know that step - growth polymers produces end groups functional end groups in the end .
For example , polyester ; polyester it has O H and COOH group .
So , we can determine titrometrically or spectroscopically these group polyamides NH 2 , COOH groups or polyurethane .
So , these groups can be determined significantly .
This is applicable to again to low molecular weights because when the polymer chains becomes very high , the number of end groups the contribution from number of end groups becomes very small .
So , detection becomes very difficult .
So , this method typically applies to low molecular weights and typically M n value of around 10 to the power 4 to in the range of 10 to power 4 is the upper limit by which we can determine by these methods .
What we measure is basically M e is the equilibrium equivalent mass is M by n which is defined as M by n ; M is the mass of the polymers or concentration of the polymers and n is the concentration of the end groups .
So , M n would be given by M e multiplied by f where f is the number of end groups per chain .
So if we can determine the concentration , we know the concentration of the polymer and what is the concentration of end group which we determined .
We can determine n , the concentration of end groups and then if you know f which is the number of end groups per polymer chain , then we can easily get the number average molecular weight .
Now we will give specific examples of determination of end group by spectroscopic method when we discuss the spectroscopy method of polymer characterization in the next or two lectures from now onwards , when we give specific examples of how to determine polymer number average molecular weight by end group determinations spectroscopically .
Before we move on to other methods of determining polymer molecular weight and namely weight average molecular weight , just to emphasize one point that we know the M n is very much sensitive to the low molecular weight species present at the impurities in a polymer sample .
For example , if we give a specific example if we have impurities , what were the impurities present in our polymer sample and we analyze that sample .
Actually if the M n for the pure polymer sample is 10000 , then if you have 0.01 weight factor of impurity , then the measured M n of the impure would be about 1500 .
So , basically even 1 percent by weight presence of water impurities is decreasing your determine M n by several factor which means we must be very careful about the impurities ; specially the low molecular impurities while determination of number average molecular weight because they have a very detrimental effect in the value we get from the number average molecular weight determination .
Let us move on to the next topic where we determine the weight average molecular rate of the polymers and we will discuss the techniques of light scattering and subsequently gene plot to get the weight average molecular weight and also some other important parameters of polymers like the second variant coefficient and polymer solvent interaction parameters and the radius of gyration .
So , what is light scattering ?
Light scattering as we know when electromagnetic radiation interacts with a molecule or a particle , it induces a dipole in the samples and the magnitude of the dipole will depend on how the charge can be separated .
For visible light radiation , it depends on the polarizibilty of the medium polarization of the molecules or the particles which is scattering light or the one which the light is bombarded .
Now once this dipole is formed , it oscillates with the electromagnetic radiation and as we know that oscillating dipole radiates light or electromagnetic radiation .
So in this case , this oscillating dipole width emits radiation or electromagnetic radiation at all direction which are the scattered light .
And typically this scattered lights have same frequency as the incident light but there are cases where there are shift in the frequency of the scattered light than in comparison to the incident light , but those are called inelastic scattering but for this determination of molecular , we will restrict to only through elastic scattering where the frequency of the scattered light is same as the frequency of the incident light .
So , what is done in the experiments ?
An incident beam is bombarded on a sample cell which contains these polymer molecules polymer solutions and then the scattered light is detected ; the intensity of the scattered light is detected at an angle theta with the incident beam .
Now this intensity of the scattered light can be fluctuating with very short time ; the time scale is very short like micro seconds to milliseconds .
Then you have a fluctuation in the scattering intensity is detected by the detector .
Now from this fluctuation of the scatter intensity which we can apply techniques ; this is like dynamic light scattering which take advantage of this fluctuation and we can get information about hydrodynamic radius for the polymer molecules And the time average intensity which we will use in the techniques called static light scattering which will give the information about absolute molecular weight , weight average molecular weight , the radius of gyration and the second semiempirical coefficient which will in turn give the information about polymer solvent interaction parameter .
So , basically the light scattering techniques can be used in two ways ; in static light scattering where we deal with the time average intensity of the scattered light and second technique can be used where we use the fluctuation of the static intensity in dynamic light scattering which gives the information about the radius of gyration .
Let us first talk about the static light scattering , because it gives many information for polymer solution .
Now as I just mentioned that this light scattering technique can happen for any electromagnetic radiations like visible light or x - ray or neutrons .
So , basically the techniques which are used are utilized to determine or to get information about polymers samples as multi angle light scattering or small angle x - ray scattering or small angle neutron scattering .
We will basically restrict our discussion mainly on multi angle light scattering and then we will just briefly mention the difference of small angle x - ray scattering and small angle neutron scattering with light scattering and what are the information you can get from and SAXS and SANS .
So , without going much into the theory of light scattering , let us go into the theory directly into the equations for the light scattering from dilute polymer solutions .
So , if you consider a polymer solution , where if you consider the polymer solutions , now if you consider its area any area or any particular area from this solution which contain pure solvent another part contain the solute and the solvent .
So each cell on an average , these are the assumption we are taking and on basis of which we will formulate this scattering equations .
The each cell has on average the same number of solvent molecules but the scattering happens .
So , weak scattering happened because of the minute fluctuation in the solvent density and because of the solute molecule itself , the concentration of solute molecules fluctuate ; either because of the translational motion Brownian motion of the solute molecules or if it is a polymer large molecule there will be conformational changes .
So because of the effective concentration fluctuation , the light scattering happens from the polymer of the solute molecules .
So , what to do to get the information about the polymer molecules or the solute molecules , we deduct the scattering from the solution from the solvent to get the excess scattering ; we will explain the terms R in the next page .
So basically in the instrument , we try to detect the scatterings only from the solute molecule in this case the polymer molecule in a dilute solution so that there are not much intermolecular interactions and we deduct the scattering which we detect for or determine from a solute solution from the solvent so that we can get the information of on scattering from only from the solute molecules .
So , we directly go to the scattering equation which based on the basic Rayleigh equation for light scattering and then also from the fluctuation theory based on Eintsein and Smoluchowski .
This is for a small molecule ; the solute having a small molecule point scatterer .
So , we can get an equation like this where R is delta R theta is as we said that the Rayleigh ratio ; this R for Rayleigh ratio basically take cares of the intensity .
It is basically the intensity ; it is basically the scattering intensity which is normalized with the scattering angle .
So , Rayleigh ratio is basically this expression and delta R theta is nothing but Rayleigh ratio for the particular theta for the solution minus Rayleigh ratio for the solvent .
We define K in all the terms which we know .
So , for the experiments we know this n 0 or eta 0 is the solvent refractive index , d n by d c is the specific refractive index increment for the solute , lambda is the web length of the incident light , N A is Avogadro number .
So , we know all this terms and we define a term called optical constant k as this to make this expression simpler .
So finally , we can get an equation like this .
So , this expression is valid for point scatterer where no intramolecular interference happen between them no interference happened between the scattered light ; the same scattered light originate from the different parts of a scatterer .
So , basically we can write or we can say that as a basic principle of light scattering that first principle is that amount of light scattering is directly proportional to the product of polymer molar mass M and concentration and this term which is specific refractive index increment .
This expression is valid .
This is proportional to the concentration only for dilute solution where the intersolute molecule interaction is absent , basically then we can add the scattering intensity from different molecules without considering any destructive interference between them .
Now if we are just talking about this expression at point scatterer where the molecule does not or the scattering from different parts of the molecules do not interfere with each other .
If we plot the Rayleigh ratio with different angle that will give the same intensity ; remember we are talking about Rayleigh ratio which have cos square theta term in the denominator .
If you only consider the i theta by I 0 then for small molecules your intensity will look like something like this .
So , this is 0 angle , and this is 180 angle , this is 90 degree .
But if we plot this Rayleigh ratio ; so what we will do we will start from .
In the next lecture we will discuss the scattering from angular dependence on the light scattering for large molecule or polymer molecules which we have angular dependence ; the light scattering will be angular dependence .
We will start from there in the next lecture .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry , and today we are going to move from of discussion , on step growth polymers to chain growth polymerization .
And we will begin with radical chain polymerization , for about four to five lectures , followed by ionic polymerization , and other types of chain polymerization , later lectures .
In this lecture we are going to cover , general features of chain polymerization , which we will basically revisit from our introduction lecture .
And then we will talk about feasibility of chain polymerization , how the structure of monomers determines , which type of initiator would choose , and different modes of propagation of a free , in a free radical polymerization , different types of initiator and initiator efficiency .
Now let us revisit , the discussion we had on chain polymerization in first two , lectures during introduction .
What are the general features of a , chain polymerization process .
In the step polymerization we have seen that we need , at least two functional groups , so that the reaction can happen between the functional groups , but in case of chain polymerization , we need one functional group , mono functional group , in most cases it is a double bond .
We can do polymerization , chain polymerization with more than one functional group as well , but then in that case like the previous case of step polymerization , it will give cross linking in the polymerization , not the complete linear polymerization .
So if you have only one functional group in this case double bond , it is sufficient to give you linear polymers .
Now , polymerization , chain polymerization are in general consist of three steps ; three main step , initiation , propagation , and termination .
In initiation step , initiator reactive species R is formed , from initiator molecule I , this reactive species then react with a monomer , gives you a chain initiating species .
This will initiate chain , by reaction reacting with further monomers , forming extended chain , and this will progressed to make a complete polymers .
So this is part of initiation steps , this is propagation steps , and also we have termination step .
You also have another step ; you know another possible step like , transfer , reactions which we will discuss when it is necessary .
So in this case , you require a reactive species , to initiate the polymer chain , unlike in step polymerization , where you did not require a , in the reactive species .
And depending upon this nature of this reacting species R splash , you can classify these chain polymerization reactions in different types ; for example if the R star is , reactive species in this case , is a free radical , then we name this reaction or polymerization as a free radical polymerization .
If this is a cation , then it is a cationic polymerization , if this is a anion , then it is a anionic polymerization .
chain polymerization could be other types as well , for example polymers using , type of , other type of catalyst like catalyst , and also it could be , different other types which are not the majority , or a major class of chain polymerization , but they also are part of the group of chain polymerization ; for example ring - opening polymerization , group - transfer polymerization and so on .
We will talk about these polymerizations , when in a later lectures briefly .
We will come back to the general features of chain polymerization , we by this time you know that , we can build linear polymers in chain polymers from a mono functional group .
Then chain polymerization is usually consist of three main step ; initiation , propagation , and termination .
And usually there is no loss of molecular fragments , like , in case step polymers , we had stormed , small molecular condensates , where coming out , during polymerization process , but in this case there is no loss of fragments .
And we also know from our original discussion that , we don ’ t require high conversion .
Unlike a step growth polymerization , where we require a high conversion to a high molecular rate , in this case , we do not require a high conversions to build a high molecular rate .
If you recollect from the discussion we had , in the first two lectures that , in case of chain polymerization , the molecular rates builds very soon , and then it says , at very low conversion itself , it builds very high molecular weight , and the molecular weight remains has high , you know and very high during the conversion .
There are some other things might results , in change in this nature of the , this line , at very high conversion , which will come back in the proper time .
So in this case we have seen , from earlier case as well , and earlier discussion as well , that at very low conversion itself , molecular weight obtained is high , and there is the time progress , more and more number polymer chains form , and , but the molecular weight remains more or less similar , which is very high .
Now in this polymerization , chain polymerization monomers are , monomer is present throughout , but it concentration decreases gradually or steadily , and we also know that in , during this chain polymerization we have only monomer , or high molecular rate polymers .
We do not have these intermediate molecular weight oligomers , like in step growth polymerization .
We have either monomer , or high molecular polymers , and also have you know , this initiator molecules , and solvent if we required this chain .
In case of chain growth polymerization , our chain grows only by addition of reactive species , or the monomer at the end .
At one end of the growing chain , if the polymer progress , then a monomer is always added at the end of the polymers , to grow the chain further .
And these chain reactions are typically have very high exotherms , and low activation energy , and if you just think little more about the , mechanism of this chain polymerization .
Typically , you have a pi bond , is converting to a sigma bond during this chain polymerization , or which is starting from a double bond .
Now this is having a , differently having a exothermic nature , this reaction .
And we also know that , we also can imagine that , when the monomers add on to form a high molecular rate polymers , the translational and trophy decreases .
so in this case the entropy change is also lower , so if you think about the thermo dynamics of this chain polymerization , briefly , at this movement , because this is exothermic negative , and this is also negative , so there is a completion between these two term .
And in normal temperature , typically the reaction temperature , it is the temperature , where we do reactions , this dominates so the reaction these chain polymerization are ; thermo dynamically feasible , in most cases are not .
This del G is less than zero , for the typical temperature , where we do reactions in the lab , which means that , most of these double bond containing monomers should polymerize given is thermo dynamic feasibility , but if you think there is the kinetic , about the kinetic factor , not every monomer not every monomer containing double bond , can be polymerized with , every type of initiator , that depends upon the structure .
The initiator which is best , or which can polymerize a monomer , containing a double bond , will depend upon the monomer structure .
For example , if we take a simple monomer ; say we take a very simple monomer like this , where y is a substituent .
now the feasibility of this monomers , to undergo polymerization , chain polymerization , by a radical or cation or a anion , would depend upon the reactivity of this double bond , and also the stability of the species which formed , due to reaction of this monomer , and the reactive species , R star which we talked about in the last page , which in turns depends upon , the inactive effect and the resonance resonating effect of this substituent group y .
for example if I have ; say y as a electron withdrawing group as nitron , so if consider a molecule like this , C N .
Now it is a electron withdrawing group , which means that , because this is present the reactivity of this double bond towards a electro file , increases , and also if there is a anionic charge here , which can be easily stabilized by the resonating effect of the nitrate group .
So if I have a anionic species , reacting with this monomer , it will form for example ; say C H 2 .
Now it can stabilize , and from like this .
so this is , this monomer acyl nitrate , will be very much feasible , reaction of this monomer will feasible by a anionic initiators , so it can undergo chain polymerization by a anionic initiator , because you have a electron withdrawing group , which can , which actually increases the reactivity of this double bond towards electro file , and also it stabilize the reacting species which formed , because of the reaction of this monomer , with the reactive species .
But if you have a cationic initiator for this case , and if you have a .
this was anionic initiator , if you have a cationic initiator for this case , then if it has to react , and form something like this .
Now this will not be stabilized by this substituent ’ s .
So , these monomers , will not undergo a cationic polymerization , it will undergo anionic polymerization , now if you have a radical for example , if your radical initiator , then it will form .
Now this can also get civilized by the process of resonance , which means that this acylnitride monomer , can be polymerized by a anionic initiator , and a radical initiator , but not by a cationic initiator .
We will take some other example .
For example we have , a monomer like this , it could be a aldehyde group .
The substitution could be aldehyde group , or a say ketone , or a acid , or ester , or amine , amide , like this , so it could be any of this groups .
Now when this monomers undergo anionic polymerization , it will form a species like this .
It could be any of this species , which we wrote here .
Now in this case also , this can get stabilized by resonance , and this will form this .
So this is also another set of monomers , which can be easily polymerized , by a anionic initiator .
Similarly this can be also polymerized , for a radical polymerization , because again this , like the earlier case , this can undergo resonance and form this .
So this type of monomer , which contain this side of , there is a carbonic carbonyl group here , they can easily undergo anionic polymerization , they can undergo radical polymerization .
But like the earlier case they cannot , this side of monomers cannot undergo , a chain polymerization initiated by a cationic species , because then if you are a cationic group here , it will not be stabilized by resonance .
Now , if you talk about this monomer .
Now this monomer , if I polymerize with a cationic initiator , then it will be a cationic species now .
Now again this can be stabilized , by resonance , by this .
So if you have a monomer like this , then it can be polymerized , by a cationic species , anionic ; no it cannot be polymerized by , cannot be anionic species , because if you have a strong electron withdrawing group here , so anionic cannot be .
If you have a resonating group here , which is electron droning neutron pushing , so it cannot stabilize a anionic group here , even if there is a weak electron withdrawing , group of by electron effect of this , word group by in the inducting effect .
Now if you have monomer like this , styrene .
If you have monomer like styrene , then what happened if you have a anionic case , I have other resonating structures if you have a cationic , and so as radical .
If you have a radical group , then it can also be stabilized by by this substituent group .
Now if I have a react , if I have a monomer like styrene , you can see that in each of these cases anionic , cationic , and radical , the reactive species which is forming , because of the reaction of the monomer , with the previous reactive species , can be easily stabilized by a resonation structure in all the three cases .
So styrene is example , where styrene can be polymerized other way anionic cationic , or a radical group has well as as well as radical group .
So these are the examples how the structure of monomer will determine , whether it can undergo chain polymerization by anionic species , anionic initiator , or a cationic initiator , or radical initiator , and we have seen the examples of several monomers , and let us see the table and we summarize , whatever we are just learned in first last five ten minutes .
So if I have a simple monomer like this , if I can have y as c o r , then we know its can be polymerized by , both radical and anionic , it cannot be polymerized by cationic .
If you have a acid or ester or amide , it can also be polymerized by radical under less anionic , if you have a nitride , again it can be polymerized by radical and anionic , not by cation .
for example if you have a , it is the substitution of phenyl group , styrene , in case of styrene then it can be polymerized by all three , and if you have a another double bond hanging from the , the original double bond then also it can be stabilized , by any of these three mechanisms anionic , cationic , and radicals , which can be polymerized by all three mechanism .
We just seen that it is a ether , then it can be polymerized by cationic , it can be difficultly polymerized by radical also , but most preferred choice of polymerizing a ether group , hanging from a double bond is to use cationic polymerization .
if it is a halogen , then its halogen is having weak inducting effect electron withdrawing inactive effect , and a weak electron donating or a electron pushing resonating effect , so because both this electron donating and withdrawing , f strains are weak , so it actually does not get polymerize either by anionic or cationic , it only gets polymerized by the radical mechanism , like vinyl chloride , and for example .
So there are other possible substitutes , which you can imagine , and depending upon the chemistry , behind it you can find out , or you can decide , whether which one to try out fast , which is the most easiest way , it can get polymerized , and if it is polymer , can be polymerized by radical that is a most easiest way of polymerizing , you know polymer process of this three .
So we come at now , only to radical polymerization .
Radical polymerization , we are talking about the chain polymerization , and different structure and different initiator now we , start solely on radical chain polymerization .
So what are the types , we can what are the types of monomers , can be used for radical polymerizations , monomer containing double bond between carbon atom .
the examples we have just seen ethylene styrene butadiene isoprene etcetera , and if the monomer containing electron donate withdrawing group , then it the polymer visibility of the double bond actually goes up , because the reasons we just talked about in last time fifteen minutes .
For examples like methylmethacrylate acrylamide , vinyl chloride , acrylonitrile vinyl acetate , etcetera can be very easily polymerizable , by a radical initiator .
Now , what are the monomers it is difficult to polymerize , or cannot be polymerized at all .
If there are more substituent ’ s , both the carbonate terms in the example , we said just showed in the last pages , where you have CH 2 C H y , instead of one substitute , if you have substitution in the both the carbon , then it becomes more difficult .
For example , if you compare one butane and two butane , it is easier to polymerize one butane than two butane .
and if it is substitution is bulky , so like if you have a biphenyl ethylene , one ethyl ethylene , then it is very difficult to polymerize , and if you have tri substitute or tetra substitute , then also its very difficult to polymerize .
So if I want to summarize , just plane structure in short of substitutions .
If you have no substitution , its work fine in radical , if you have monosubstituted , it works fine , except the case where it is C H 3 propylene , will come back of why it is so .
And if you have disubstitution in single carbon , and unless they are not bulky , it usually works if they are very bulky , then because of the esoteric reasons they did not work and the… Now , from here if you go , move from more and more substitution , the reaction will become more and more difficult , like this is very difficult , and this two trisubstituted and tetra substituted almost never works in a radical polymerization .
So , what I mean the case of this allylic monomer .
For example the propylene , we just mentioned in the last slide .
If you have radical , then it can react with a poly propylene to form , a initiating chain initiating species , which can react with other propylene monomer , and progress the chain or propagate the polymer chain , and this can be stabilized inductively by this .
So there should not be any problem , in that sense .
But , if you compare the other alternative , which is shown here .
If this R dot abstract a hydrogen from here , from neutral species R H , then you have this radical species generated .
Now , which is even much stable stabiler than the previous case , because here in this case it is stabilized by resonance .
So in most cases , this reaction , this reaction dominates than these reactions , so it ’ s this is one of the cases of transfer .
So this is for these reasons this pro propylene is difficult to polymerize by radical , and this does not happen if you have to say , monomer like methylmethacrylate , where there is no possibilities , this possibility does not arise .
Now , how a , if you have a monomer like this , C H 2 , again come back to that very simple monomer .
Now this can react with r star , r star can react on this carbon or this carbon , if it reacts with this carbon when it forms y , and if this reacts with this carbon , then form something like this .
Now , how does it propagate , this can react with either of these two carbon , in terms of possibilities , so if its react with this , then it forms .
If this reacts with other side , then it forms , as species like this .
Now given this two structure , now the fact that , this monomer which is reacting with this reactant species , which means that , whether this is radical or cat ion or anion , will get stabilized , by the substitution y present .
So it is always given these and this choice , because the presence of this stabilizing group y as a substituent .
This reaction , this side is always preferred , unlike not this .
So approach of R to this carbon is always preferred over this carbon .
Now if you have .
So this is dominating or this almost exclusively formed , compared to this , because of the electronic stabilization of the y group .
Now this can , for the same reason , this is preferred , compared to this .
And here it is , it is the additional factor that , you have a group .
The approach of these , if it is the approach from this side , it will be even satirically hinders .
So it is approach from this carbon is , preferred , both electronically and satirically .
So if I write this side as head , and this is tail .
Then finally , we get a polymer which has in head tail head tail arrangement .
So in chain polymerization , you have , finally when the polymer formed , you get a head tail head tail arrangement , not any of these , if , whether it is a head or tail does not matter , you can have a tail head tail head tail head arrangement as well , does not matter , but it is basically alternate , head tail head tail head tail type arrangement in the polymer structure of the monomers .
This is because of both satirical electronic , and steri creations .
Now , we are talking about radical polymerization , and what are the different types of initiator we can use .
Now what is the source for initiator , we require a radical species to initiate the polymer chain , and we now we will look at what are the molecules which , or what are the possible ways we can generate radical , in the reaction medium .
Now to have a radical species , to generate a radical species in the reaction medium , you should always prefer or it is very logical that , the radical should not generate at in ambient conditions , like room temperature , where you store this , your monomer or the initiator itself .
While storing it should not generate radicals , or it is the initiator molecules should not be such that , it is very difficult .
You require very high temperature to , generate a radical form that initiator molecules , and also this , radical the initiator molecules would generate radical , in a moderate rate , so that they can be utilized in the reaction , it should not be very fast .
If it is very fast radical generation , then the reaction will be extremely fast , and because this chain polymerization is exothermic , reaction is very fast , and you can imagine the amount of heat generated , during the reaction , which could be a hazard , it can actually explode , if it the reaction which is too high , and if is too slow then your reaction will take much longer , your radical generation is too low , then your reaction will take much longer time .
So there are three criteria say initiators should fulfill ; one is that it should be readily available off course , specially for commercial application , it should be readily available , and it should be stable , at amnion condition if you are storing it in amnion condition at room temperature , even if you are storing in a refrigerator , it should be stable in that condition , it should not generate radical , under the condition of storage .
And off course the third one we just talked about , that it should generate radical in a practical rate , at normal reaction temperature , it should not be too slow , for the reactions to take much longer time , or it should not be too high , then there are there are possibilities of hazard , because of a exothermic reaction happening in much faster rate .
So , what are the initiators , we are initiated procedure , we typically use in a radical chain polymerization .
First one is , thermal initiator , and thermal initiator is , a initiation by homolicious of a molecule , by thermal energy , leading to formation of two radicals , and the typically .
Here we are talking about homoliticalic leaving one bond , and making two radical .
Now the bond energy should be such that , the bond should not leave at low temperature at room temperature , or it should not be very high .
The bond innovation will not be very hicks , so that you require a , much higher temperature , to break that homiletically .
So the typical range of bond energy , which are used for a initiator , to be applicable has a thermal initiator is , around 100 to 170 kilo joule per mol .
And typically if you have , this peroxides , or this s s bonds or if you have n o bonds in your molecules ; these bonds typically having bond dissociates energy of this range , so they form on hitting , and a normal , the reaction temperature they form radical , each molecule form two radicals .
For example if you consider this peroxides , could be acyl peroxide acetyl or benzyl ; for example , if I write the structure of benzylperoxide , it can break homiletically on thermal energy , on hitting to c o dot .
Now we can have alkyl peroxides as well ; for example cumyl or t - butyl peroxides .
Let us take example of cumyl peroxide , it can dissociate into two such radicals .
Also this hydro peroxides ; for example t - butyl hydro peroxide , it can also undergo homiletic cleavage forming two radicals .
Other examples also like peresters , let us talk about in next page .
For example t - butyl phenyl benzoate , it can break from here , and form two different radicals .
Now , the other main types of initiator , thermal initiator are azo compounds .
For example 2 2 dash azo bis isobutyronitrile , which is most commonly named as , or called as A I B N , which is having this following structure .
Now this can break into two species , let us write in the next page .
Plus N 2 .
Now in this case , this , the bond C N bond is not , this bond is not of the , having that bond dissociation energy , between 100 to 170 kilo joule per mol ; that ’ s the bond energy , optimal bond energy talked about .
This is actually having higher 290 kilo joule per mol , but because of this nitrogen generation , this molecule , this dissociation also becomes feasible , or very much feasible at normal reaction temperature .
Other examples of azo compounds are , for example 4 4 dash azo bis cyanovaleric acid .
So , these are the examples , typical example of this azo compounds of this .
This compounds specifically is that it is water soluble , water soluble at p h greater than 7 , so you can use this azo compounds at acquits medium as well .
So that it can be used for generating , or radical polymerization is acquits medium as well , whereas A I B N can be used in the radical polymerization in organic solvents , so organic medium .
The other types of this radical initiator are , like for example disulfide .
I have R S and S R , giving 2 R S dot , or I have tetrazenes , which breaking and giving 2 R N to R 2 N dot plus nitrogen , or it could be other peroxides ; for example you have potassium , it can have these peroxides as well .
So these are the typical examples of the radical initiators .
These are the generally used radical initiator , and most common is A I B N and benzyl peroxides which are used in the lab .
Now , this radical is get generated from a initiator species , now if I want to find out how fast this radical generation happen , we can write this rate equation , which is basically dissociation constant , multiplied by the , this follows fast order kinetic , so its multiplied by initiator concentration , which will give you , this on interrogation , where I 0 is the concentration of unity initiator at t is equal to 0 , and this is some other t .
Now if you define t half , where a time , where I is I 0 by 2 , if you define t half as the time , where the concentration of initiator has halved , then you can write t half is , can put I is I 0 by 2 , you can get this .
So from the dissociation constant you can get the t half value , and these dissociation constant also , or the bred constant for dissociation reaction , also depend upon the temperature , where you are doing your reaction .
Now , if you want to do a reaction , and you should have prior knowledge about the initiator molecule , prior knowledge about their t half value , or the time it takes to become half .Then you can choose your reaction temperature , or if you want to do your reactions some particular temperature , or a range of temperature , then you can choose the proper initiator for your reaction .
For example if I look at the t half values for the some commonly used initiator .
For example , if I take very commonly used example , like A I B N and benzyl peroxides , said B P O , benzyl peroxide , and if I write the values of t half , t half then let us have these numbers .
So if these are the t half numbers , for commonly used initiator A I B N and B P O .
So , A I B N have t half value of at 50 degree centigrade about 74 hours , whereas 100 degree centigrade , which has a t half of 7.2 minutes ; that means if you use A I B N as the initiator , for reaction which you are carrying out at 100 degree centigrade , then your reaction is very fast , it will complete , and all the A I B N , at least half of the A I B N will consumed in 7 minutes , so your you can imagine your reaction is very fast .
Whereas if you do at 50 degree centigrade , then even its 74 hours , so almost like three days you have , half of the initiator is dissociated to form radical , so that means it is too slower reaction , if you do it at 50 degree centigrade .
So for that is the example A I B N is typically used as around 60 to 80 degree centigrade , and benzyl peroxide typical reaction temperature is between 80 to 95 degree centigrade .
And t half value for , at 10 hours the temperature at which , t half value becomes 10 hours , its typically the most , what I say , most used temperature , where t half is 10 hours , and for that A I B N is about 60 degree centigrade and B P O is about 65 degree centigrade , but it is all depends upon how fast you want to carry out reaction , you have to choose your temperature accordingly ; for example A I B N , and if you want to use a 100 degrees , it is too faster reaction .
So it is always recommended that you should use A I B N at this range , and B P O in this range , to have a moderate reaction rate .
Now we have , and typical this values of kd ’ s are .
Typical values of kd for thermal initiator is , 10 to the power minus 4 to 10 to the power minus 9 second inverse , and the usage range , where your kd is formed 10 to the power minus 2 , 10 to the power minus 6 centimeter .
The temperature where your kd is lies between these ; that is the temperature , where the reaction is typically done .
So we have now know , that what are the molecules are typically used for thermal initiation , and what are the criteria in that initiator molecule should be , and looking at the t half values at different temperature , we should choose a temperature , and a initiator combination , for a particular reaction if you want to do a reaction for a particular temperature , then if you choose a initiator molecule accordingly .
So , now let us move to other type of initiator , and next let us look for redox initiator .
So let us look for redox initiators , and the name suggest if you have a reluctant and have a oxidants , so for example if you have a peroxide , plus a , this is oxidizing agent plus a , reducing agent .
For example , if you have a hydrogen peroxide plus farers , so it is giving to H O minus plus H O dot plus F e 3 plus .
Instead of hydrogen peroxide , you can use the other peroxides , so hydro peroxides as well , and this case you can use other ions as well .
These are the types you can use here , and you can type here , but the general reaction is same , and the reaction is much faster , and it can be done at room temperature , or even at lower temperature 0 to 5 degree centigrade , or something .
If you want to do a reaction at low temperature for whatever reason , then this is the initiator system , you can apply and as these things are soluble in acquits medium , you can carry out the acquits radical polymerization using , redox initiator like this , or even if you want to do a , your radical polymerization in emulsions , then also this type of reactions can be initiator can be used .
The other type of redox initiator , are the example of redox initiator is , per sulfate and di amine plus di amine , again a combination of redox reducing and oxidizing agents .
So benzyl peroxide and , say n diethyl , I mean if R is ethyl group , then it reacts and give this .
Now k d of this reaction is , at 60 degree centigrade .
Whereas , k d for B P O at 90 degree centigrade was 1.33 into 10 to the power minus 4 second inverse .
Which means that , this is much faster , this redox reaction is much faster , so generation of radical by redox initiator can be done at much lower temperature , room temperature , or even lower temperature .
Whereas in B P O , the case of thermal initiator , the reaction rate is much lower .
So , you need a higher temperature , for doing the polymerization reaction .
So what we will do in the next lecture , we will continue this , the other types of initiator , and including the remaining example of , the redox , the possibilities of redox initiator .
So we will come back and start in the next lecture from this redox , the other example of redox initiators .
Welcome back to this course on Polymer Chemistry .
In today ’ s lecture we are going to discuss about amorphous and crystalline states of polymers .
And with related to that , we will talk about the glass transition temperature and the melting point of polymers and then we will talk about the relationship between chemical structures of polymer chain and how it is effects the values of glass transition temperature and melting point .
I will brief discuss about the measurement techniques of T g and T m .
Before we start today ' s content , let me just take two to three minutes to explain the last slide or last slide page in my previous lecture , last lecture ; because I thought that I did , because of time it was completed hurriedly .
I just want to spend five minutes there .
Now if , for example , what we were doing yesterday that I discussed that if I for example , have two phenol ; bisphenol in this case and now they may react with some carbonate source to make to form polycarbonate .
Now , this example I am giving for polycarbonate , but this is , this analysis is applicable for any polymer , any copolymer specially for poly condensation copolymers ; where you have , you can find out a carbon which are signal , anymore signal dependent on the two two groups which is holding that bond .
Now , you can have the three types of carbonate linkage .
‘ A O C O O A ’ , I just give it example here , and B O C O O B and you can have A O C O O B .
Now , this is this is similar to having B O C O O .
Now , this two are similar .
Now , in a polymer copolymer chain which will be favorable ?
Of course they depend upon the reactivity of the monomers in this A and B and obviously the feed monomer composition .
Now for example , if we assume first that the reactivity of this two monomers is same , then if I take a fifty - fifty ratio of the feed monomer composition by more person , by number , then obviously the chances of that A O H will react with another A O H to form a carbonate ; will be given by 0.5 in to 0.5 .
There , these are fifty percent of this bisphenols are this type .
So , the chances of this type of carbonate linkage is forming 0.25 , if I have fifty - fifty ratio in the feed .
Similarly , the chances of this type of carbonate linkage is given by again 0.25 , if I have fifty - fifty ratio in the feed .
Similarly , the chances of this type of carbonate linkage is given by again 0.25 and individually these two are again 0.25 , so together they get 0.5 .
So , obviously if I having a random polymerization where it is only dictated by the feed monomer composition , not by the reactivity of the two monomers , then a fifty - fifty feed composition will produce these three carbonate linkage .
Similarly , if I have a , say 25 A ; A is to be 25 and 75 , then chances of forming A O C O O A will be 0.25 multiplied by 0.25 ; A O C O O B , 0.25 into 0.75 again ; twice because for the other way round and for B O C O O B will be 0.75 into 0.75 .
See , if for A this small ratio ; so if I found after the polymerization is made from our carbon that the ratio for these three carbonated is for fifty - fifty feed ratio , monomer ratio , then we will know that it is a random copolymer .
So , the reactivities are not different .
Similarly , if we have a this ratio of these three carbonates , then we will know that this is a random arrangement .
And if the obtained signal ratio is different from any of the values , it will be suppose to for a statistical random copolymer , then we will know that block is there in the polymer .
So , this exactly has been shown by plotting in this .
So , if you change the feed ratio , what will be the ratio ?
This is for A A and this is for B B , this is for A A .
So , this A for carbonate or any other… polymer ; this is for B B and this is for A B A B linkages .
This is the plot of monomer mole fraction verses feed mole ratio .
Ok . Now , let us come back to today ’ s topic of lecture about amorphous and crystalline state .
Till now what we have done ?
We have already made the polymer .
We know how to make the polymer from our understanding of polymer synthesis and then we know that how it behaves in solution .
And with that knowledge , we were able to find out the chemical composition of the polymer .
And if it is a copolymer what is the composition , what is the , what is the sequence of monomer present in the monomer in the polymer and we know what is the molecular weight of the polymer .
So , we know all the basically what are the information needed for the polymer .
We know by this time .
So , what is what we will do this ?
What we will do now with the polymer ?
Obviously , we want to use this polymer for some applications .
And , I have discussed in the very beginning that polymers are utilized in mainly two O H bonds .
These polymers after synthesized are added in some formulations along with the other components like in detergent , paint , ink , emulsions ; where polymers are added with some other compounds .
So , polymer is one of the components among many .
Secondly , which is almost the majority of the application of polymeric material or polymers is where the polymer is the main component .
It is almost close to hundred percent polymers and you have the additives or fillers , which basically are the property enhancer or stabilizers or color and dye .
Those are the added components .
So , mainly it is the polymer .
So what , how do you make those polymers like if you feel disc , if you want to make a CD or DVD out of a polymeric material ?
We have synthesized the polymer and characterized ; now we have to give or you to make a polymer in a different shape , which is the shape of the final applications of that polymers .
So , for that we must know the behavior of a polymer in solid state .
Solid state in the sense , where the polymer is applied in room temperature , it is not viscous .
What it is not a as we will discuss that “solid state ” may not be the thermodynamically correct terminology in case of Polymer Science .
What solid by state , I mean that it is not flowing in the condition where we are using .
So in polymers , polymers in that solid state can be mostly in two types .
Where , they can be semi - crystalline ; Semi - crystalline , when it has this crystalline regions and which are basically ordered .
And amorphous region , where amorphous material , where there is no order .
We all know what is a crystal ?
And we know crystalline solid , liquid and gaseous state of matters ; three state of matters .
Where in case of crystalline state , solid state , we have long - range order ; in case of liquid state we have short - range order and in gaseous state we do not have any order .
And , we have sub - temperature or sub - temperature conditions , where these two transitions takes place from gas to liquid state at volume point and from a liquid to solid state as a freezing point .
So , you know that there are three states possible for a matter .
In case of polymers , this solid state is not actually a proper .
in true sense , solid states because in most cases , either it is fully amorphous , no long - range order is present and in second case they could be partly crystalline ; partly , there could be long range order exists and partly there will be no order .
So , it is a combination of amorphous and crystalline region .
So , we call this as a semi crystalline state .
It is not practically possible to get purely hundred percent crystalline polymer , because of your size is mainly because of size or large molecular weight .
So , we mostly delete semi - crystalline polymer , which is basically partly crystalline and partly amorphous .
And amorphous , which is hundred percent amorphous , zero percent crystalline region .
Now , what happened if we take water and cool it down ?
Say , for example , this one , case one ; if we take a water vapor and then the water , just consider water , liquid water and then cool it down .
The specific volume will go down .
It will happen for most of the basis .
There could be some disturbance for water , but I am talking about in general any liquid .
Just consider a general liquid ; with decrease in the temperature , the specific volume will decrease and at a particular temperature freezing point , the specific temperature will go a discontinuity and then it will form a crystalline state .
And again , the specific volume will decrease with the decrease in temperature , but in a much slower rate than it was in case of liquid state .
Now , what happened in case of polymer ?
See , if I have a polymer melt I have a polymer melt polymer melt , obviously there are many changes .
I am drawing few changes here with different inks .
Trying to draw polymer chains having different with different inks .
Just imagine , these three are the different polymer chains in melt , then tangled .
They have thermal motions ; they have kinetic energy associated with them .
Now , if you cool this or reduce the temperature of this polymer melt , obviously this viscosity goes up and the polymers start flowing less .
Now if you further cool down , what happened ?
In case of a small molecular liquid , they would have a certain temperature in freezing point or melting point , they would have arranged or form a crystal with long range order .
But in case of polymers , when you are cooling these trans , these polymer chains do not have enough space or they do not have enough time to sort of arrange themselves and align themselves , so that they make a crystal .
So , to have a crystal , say for example , if I want to make a crystal , either these polymer chains should arrange in order or they can , a single polymer chain can fold like this and can make a order .
So , basically if you are talking about two , three polymers , they can form like different crystalline states .
So , what I am trying to explain ?
That when you cool a polymer melt , it is not possible for the entire polymer must , to crystallize mainly because of there is not enough space or you are not giving enough time to the polymer chains to arrange or align themselves in a crystalline manner or maybe the polymer chemical structures do not allow them to align in a regular manner .
So , if it does not crystallize at melting point and you keep on decreasing the temperature , what will happen ?
The viscosity will further decrease .
And one point of time , the mobility , the thermal energy of this polymer chains will not be sufficient to have any mobility , any long range mobility of the polymer chain .
So , the polymer chain will become like a glass .
So , if you cool a polymer sample , they can crystallize partly in this temperature or if they do not crystallize at all and if further reduced , then they can undergo , the viscosity can go up , they can become a rubbery material .
And with further drop in temperature , their mobility becomes effectively very low and they become a glassy state .
So , this temperature where you have a conversion or transformation of the rubbery state ; transition from a rubbery state to glassy state , this is not a particular temperature , but a particular range of temperature ; this is called glass transition temperature .
And the temperature at which the polymer melting happens , that is the melting temperature of a polymer .
So , a polymer can have amorphous material .
Now , we are talking about heating .
What happened in case of a polymer material ?
For a amorphous polymer , if we heat from a lower temperature region , the volume expand at the constant rate .
And at glass transition temperature , rate of expansion increases abruptly .
And as the result of this chain mobilities , a bunch of physical behavior or the mechanical , a property of this polymeric material changes , it becomes hard material , to a hard glassy materials to a soft rubbery material .
And if you continue heating , some point of time this rubbery material become like a viscous liquid .
Similarly , if you take a semi - crystalline polymer and heat it after the T g , the change in the polymer behavior is less compared to a pure amorphous , because they are part of the polymer material is amorphous ; part is crystalline .
So , changes at T g are less drastic , since the changes are restricted to amorphous regions only , where the crystalline regions are unaffected .
So , between T g and T m the semi crystalline polymer is composed of rigid crystallites ; like rigid crystallites which are composed , which are dispersed in a rubbery amorphous matrix .
And at T m where the crystallite melts , which leads to a viscous state .
So , if I want to define a glass transition temperature , that it is a temperature at which the glassy state is changed into the rubbery state .
What is the glassy state ?
It is basically , we know this ; the slide glass is hard rigid material , which have only a short - range vibrational and rotational motion of the atoms which is a hard , rigid and the brittle material .
And the rubbery state is basically having a long - range rotational motion of polymer segments and it is a soft and flexible .
So , at T g what are the transition takes place at in terms of molecular and if you think about polymer molecules , the intermolecular Van Der Waals forces they breakdown .
And this is the temperature on set of large scale molecular motions .
And we know that it undergoes glass to rubbery behaviour change .
And that is , for amorphous polymer , obviously that should be highest temperature of usage because after that , the polymer becomes so soft that it cannot be useful .
We talk more about polymer crystallinity .
Polymers as I said , it is never , the polymer crystallinity is not never up to hundred percent , it is always up to semi - crystalline .
And the nature of polymer crystalline in the semi crystal material depends on how fast your cooling , what is the condition of you that the crystallization generalization .
So , the crystallization size , the crystallites , the crystalline dimension of the shape of the crystalline regions , as well as the fraction of the inter material which are crystallize ; they all depends on several factors .
So finally , whatever crystalline material we have , that is non - equilibrium microstructures .
And in case of semi crystalline material , there is existence , coexistence in amorphous and crystalline region .
And this is the micro structure actually determines the material property .
How do you induce crystallinity in the material ?
We obviously can do it by cooling the molten polymer .
When we evaporate a polymer solution , then the polymer chains can align themselves up because evaporation is a slow step , slow process.. ... polymer chains in the solution have more time to align themselves .
So , they can form crystalline regions .
Annealing ; annealing is nothing but heating a polymer at particular temperature .
And basically what we get when we heat the polymers ?
At a certain temperature , we are providing some thermal energy .
With the help of that , the polymer chains can slowly align themselves and form crystalline regions .
And another way , we can induce crystallinity in a polymer material by drawing .
When a stretch , like stretch a amorphous polymers , then the amorphous polymer align just because it is between stretching the polymer .
We the chains can come closer and direct ; align themselves in a particular direction which basically induces crystallinity .
So , these are the example how we can… these are the different ways we can induce polymer crystallinity .
And as this emphasizes the fact that the final crystallinity in the polymer with… extend and the nature will depend upon several processes .
So , final state is a non - equilibrium state .
There are different models available for polymer crystallinity .
This is fringed micelle model , which is like these crystalline domains are micelle like structures .
So , and this crystalline regions are formed by different polymer chains .
And also , one single chain can be part of different crystalline regions .
So , crystalline regions are embedded with or embedded in these amorphous regions , which are not crystalline .
The other models it can form ; just like I was explaining it can form folded chains and align themselves to form high crystalline material .
And there are different models available like regular adjacent folds , irregular adjacent folds and nonadjacent switchbacks .
And , other module of polymer crystallines is Spherulite ; where these polymer crystallites are arranged in this manner .
As the Polymer Chemistry may not be very much interested in this that the morphology of the crystalline polymers , but we to understand the polymer properties and the structure properties relation , we must know the crystalline behaviour and different types of models in polymer material .
Now , how if the crystalline polymers is different than amorphous polymer ?
As you can understand that crystalline regions , semi - crystalline polymers will have crystalline regions of high stiff regions which basically gives you higher rigidity , but lower impact strength ; obviously , you can imagine from the structure that it will give higher density .
Crystalline polymers or semi - crystalline polymer give you a higher density to amorphous polymers .
Because of the presence of the crystalline regions , it gives resistance , higher solvent or chemical resistant .
Obviously , this because of the presence of crystallites , catalyte and invariably we get translucent to opaque material .
Presence of crystallites helps in reducing the permeability of different gases .
The crystalline polymeric material gives high heat capabilities because of the reinforcement made by the crystalline regions .
And some other properties like anisotropic and all good electrical properties you can get as a result of crystalline regions .
This is not all desired .
It should not have a perspective that all crystalline polymers are semi - crystalline polymers… better properties than amorphous polymers .
They have some better properties , but in a cost of something else .
Like it always comes , it always becomes opaque or translucent .
If you want to have applications where you need where you need a transparent polymeric material , then it is very difficult to do with a crystalline polymers .
You always stand up for choosing amorphous material .
So , there is always a balance between what you need for the final applications .
Now , let us talk about the thermodynamics of this glass transition temperature and the melting point in brief .
Now in Thermodynamics , we can have two types of transition ; first order phase transition and second order phase transition .
Now , from our thermo dynamical knowledge we can write these expressions .
Now , in first order transitions what happened ?
If we plot G verses any of the straight parameters like temperature , pressure , volume , then it changes continuously .
This is a continuous change of free energy with the state parameters like pressure , temperature , volume .
Whereas if we plot any of the first derivative of the Gibbs energy function like V or H or S with any of this parameter , then we are we get a discontinuity in this plot .
So , basically first order transitions gives continuity in G verses T , P , V plot , whereas the first derivative of G is discontinuous when we plot against these state parameters .
Whereas in second order transition ; in case of second order transition both of these are continuous functions , but the second derivative of the Gibbs free energy function G is varies with these parameters discontinuously .
For example , if I consider a H and then plot a H verses say T , we will have the discontinuity in the in this variation of a H with temperature .
So , basically what does it mean ?
It mean that the first order transitions which , in case of first order transitions like melting where G is a linear function of basically it varies with temperature , pressure and volume continuously .
And the first derivative will vary discontinuously , whereas in case of second order transition , the second derivative of the Gibbs free energy function varies discontinuously .
So , if you just look at this curve one more time , the melting is a first order transition , where G varies with temperature , the x - axis is the temperature , with G varies continuously with temperature and the first derivative of G , V , H , S , they varies discontinuously .
Whereas in T g , the glass transition temperature which varies discontinuity with the second derivative of the Gibbs free energy function .
Let C p and so C , this is to be C p ; C p verses T would be discontinuous function because this is the second derivative of G and these are the first derivative of G .
So it , does it mean that we know that T m from this curves we know that glass transition melting temperature is a melting is a first order transition , thermodynamic first order transition , but whether does this mean that glass transition is a second order transitions thermodynamically ?
The answer is no because the fact that the glass transition temperature depends upon also the rate at which we cool the polymer matrix or polymer melt .
If you cool fast , then T g will be higher ; if we give more time , the polymer chains to arrange themself and give more time , which means cool slowly , then T g will be lower ; which means is that , these curves will look like same , but this temperature glass transition temperature will vary , if we change the cooling rate or incase of reverse direction heating rate .
So , this is not a… Hence this is not a true second order thermodynamic transition , but for a particular heating rate the phase transition between the glassy state , and the rubbery state is resembles with a second order thermodynamics transition .
Now , what are the factors from a Polymer Chemistry point of view ?
In , especially in Polymer Chemistry course , we must know what are the factors that responsible or that affects the value of T g .
So , we can design the polymers of certain structure , certain chemical structure to get a desired value of T g .
Now , the main factors : the T g depends on the free volume .
Free volume is the volume occupied by not occupied by the polymer .
If you are talking about polymer melt , it is the volume which is not occupied or the way the polymer chains .
So , if you consider just a liquid , then there will be lots of you know , then there will be lots of intermolecular spaces which are not occupied by the molecules ; that those are free volumes .
And if you increase the temperature typically , if the free volume increases , the polymer becomes lesser than or the materials becomes less dense .
So , free volume of a polymer material depends on molecular weight , presence of plasticizers or plasticizing side group cross linking .
We will discuss this , effect of this little detailed with examples .
Another very important factor which determine the value of T g is the mobility to rotate or the mobility of the polymer chains .
If the polymer for example , if it is very stiff , the rotation between the single bond , around the single bond is restricted , then the mobility of the polymers comes down .
So if that happens , then the polymer chain have much less mobility compared to a much flexible chain .
So , basically the degrees of freedom for internal rotation or the mobility of the chain effect the value of T g .
And this rotation or the mobility of the polymer chain depends upon the stiffness of the backbone or the flexibility of the backbone , steric effect , side group , which is basically governed by the side group present and inter molecular forces ; the more intermolecular forces , the less is the freedom to move .
So , what I will do ?
I will take these factors one by one and give examples ; few real examples to emphasize or convince you or the how this factors effects the T g of a polymer material or a polymer .
Now , we must remember that it is very difficult to change only one of these parameters , just only one parameter ; because changing one parameter , these are all interlinked sometime .
So , they may changing one parameter may also change the effect on the other parameter .
So , it is very difficult always to attribute one change in value of glass transition temperature , T g for a particular reason .
But , at least we can estimate , we can find out the direction that , if we do certain changes of a certain polymer structure of what the expected change in the glass transition should be .
So , let us first talk about the chain backbone stiffness .
So , let us first talk about the effect of polar groups .
Consider this iso poly isoprene and poly chloroprene ; this is chloroprene and this is isoprene .
This has the T g 73 minus 73 degree centigrade and this is minus 20 degree centigrade .
Compare another set of polymer polystyrene four poly four vinyl chlorobenzene , the values for the T g are given by 100 degree centigrade , 110 and 142 .
This is one set ; this is second set .
Let us compare another set ; polypropylene and polyvinyl chloride .
This is around 10 degree ; this is only around 87 degree .
So , for example , here the effect of this chlorine and methyl group on the rotation , basically if the steric effect caused by this two or more similar .
So , any change in these T g values are because of the most likely because of the interaction between the intermolecular forces between the two chains .
This is having more , more polar , the intermolecular forces between the polyvinyl chloride chains are much higher compared to polypropylene chains .
So , the T g goes up .
Similarly , you can get the other side of examples .
The more is the polarity of these bonds , the more is the inter molecular forces between the polymer chains , which causes in effect more stiffness in the chains which makes the T g , which decreases the polymer mobility and which makes the T g higher .
Same here the more polar , the more intermolecular forces and more higher T g .
So , which means if we increase the polarity of the bonds , more will be the intermolecular attraction ; T g will go up .
Let us talk about the effect of backbone stiffness ; backbone of the polymer chain .
Let us compare example of polydimethylsiloxane or P D M S .
This is having T g of minus 120 , polyethylene minus 80 and say it is a much rigid backbone ; polypropylene oxide P P O , 200 degree centigrade .
Let us compare another set of polyamides ; same class of polymers .
Polyamide ; nylon 3 , T g is 110 to 200 degree centigrade .
Similarly we can write , we can know what is the… this is the number of… carbon atom which gives this number ; so 3 carbon atom ; nylon 3 .
So , similarly we can write nylon 6 , nylon 11 , which gives T g of 52 degree centigrade , 42 degree centigrade and one very rigid polyamide , polybenzamide , T g is 500 degree centigrade .
And , another set of example is the polyester .
The T g is minus 63 degree , whereas if I replace this with a rigid phenyl backbone keeping everything else same , then the T g goes up .
Now , look at these three set of example .
We can clearly see .
Here , we only change this ( C H 2 ) 4 backbone with a much stiffer backbone , which basically restrict the rotational freedom around this chain , which makes the polymer backbone much stiffer .
And hence , the T g goes up .
Similarly , the example here ; these two are stiff components .
So , more C H 2 groups we put in between the polymer chains , more flexible or less stiff .
So T g comes down , whereas again if we instead of a normal alkene chain in between , if you have a rigid… groups which is basically restrict rotation around single bonds , the T g drastically goes up .
Similarly , silicon oxygen bond is a very flexible bond .
So , T g is very low ; minus 120 degree .
There is no side group present , which basically does not restrict at all the rotation around the single bond which polyethylene chain is very flexible .
And T g is minus 80 , whereas putting rigid group in the backbone makes the polymer very stiff , which keeps the T g very high .
So , basically again if the backbone of the polymer chain increases , the stiffness of the backbone of the polymer chain increases or the T g goes up or the flexibility increases , the T g comes down .
Let us now discuss the effect of steric effect .
Basically , steric effect or let me write steric effect of side groups .
So , if you just compare a simple example of polyethylene , C H 2 C H 3 polypropylene , polystyrene and four vinyl anthrosin .
Obviously , if you look at these structures , the rotation because of the substitute present , the bulky substituent present as a carbonate term , the rotation becomes more and more with the increase in the size of this substituent .
Now , we can always argue that with the increase in the size ; most likely when there was interaction between the chains , also increases which causes increase in intermolecular forces .
That may be also true , so that continuity in some extent of this cause of increase in T g with more bulky group .
But , most likely the increase is in T g .
The increase in T g , which increase in size of the side groups is mainly because of the restriction of the rotation .
So , the polymer because of the increase in the size , the polymer chain goes , the polymer stiffness goes up and hence the T g goes up .
So , which means that if we have bulky side groups , the polymer chains becomes more stiff .
The as a result , the T g goes up .
Molecular weight of a polymer chain also contribute in the value of T g , but it effect the molecular weight actually dies down after some molecular weight .
So , basically with increase in the molecular weight , the T g goes up to certain point .
And then basically the value of T g becomes independent of molecular weight .
It can be explained for the fact that the chain ends , for the polymer chain the ends are more mobile , more flexible because in case , the one of the sides it is not tied up from both sides , whereas some , any segments in between they are tied up by both the sides .
So , ends are more mobile and have more free volume and hence they has they have more free volume .
And if you increase the free volume , polymer has more space to basically more space to chain with contribution and it becomes more mobile and the T g goes down .
So for a chain , the more is the contribution from ends , the more is the free volume ; hence the T g is slower .
So , for shorter molecular weight the contribution from chain , hence the significant , hence the T g is low .
And with increasing the chain length , the molecular weight , the contribution from the ends goes down progressively .
And after a certain molecular weight , the chain , hence do not contribute too much .
So , the value of T g becomes steady value .
Generally , we compare in for polymer application .
We take molecules use or use polymers having molecular weight much above than these , so for practical purposes at the practical range of molecular weight , which usually used for applications of polymers .
They are they do not change the T g with molecular weight .
Next , talk about the effect of plasticizing side groups .
Let us take particular example of methyl methacrylate .
So , let us talk about example of methyl methacrylate .
If R C H 3 which is methyl methacrylate and T g is around 105 ; if we ethyl is 65 ; n - propyl 38 ; n - butyl minus 2 ; n - octyl minus 42 ; n - lauryl minus 62 degree centigrade .
So , look if we , if you further apart from the backbone , they keep on increasing the chain length .
What happens ?
With a further increase in the chain polymer side chain , they do not contribute too much in the restriction of the bond rotation ; whatever restriction have been imposed in the bond rotation , they have done by first few atoms .
So , if you put further substitution , reaction do not contribute much in the terms of a restriction in bond rotation .
But because of their mobility , the side chains , they generate lots of free volume and hence the entire polymer chain becomes more mobile .
So , as a result the T g drops .
So , if the side chain molecular weight goes up or size goes up , the T g grows some .
This is nothing but sort of plasticizing effect .
As if these molecules are dissolved in the polymer of this .
But if we compare , like compare n - propyl substitution with isopropyl substitution , then the T g goes up little bit ; 38 to 50 degree centigrade .
Compare n - butyl with isobutyl and tertiary butyl substitution ; this is 29 and tertiary butyl is 64 degree centigrade .
Whereas this n - butyl is minus 2 ; isobutyl is 29 ; tertiary butyl is 64 degree centigrade .
So , look here because now this , when you have this isobutyl and tertiary butyl group , they are becoming bulky in this way and whereas n - propyl groups , they are becoming bulk or increasing size .
So , the free volume because of this long chain is much more compared to the free volume produced by bulky groups having a spherical type shape or coil type shape .
So , they give actually less free volume to the polymer chain and also they may contribute little bit about the restriction chain rotation .
So , they actually increase in the polymer , increasing the restriction .
So , next talk about the plasticizing , the plasticizer .
Plasticizers are nothing but small molecules which basically dissolve in the polymer matrices and like the solvent or some added molecules .
If some residue on solvents present in the polymer matrix , then what happened ?
Because of the solvent molecules or small molecules or the free molecules , the solvent goes up .
And hence , the polymer mobility goes up and T g also goes down .
So , presence of plasticizer makes the polymer T g comes down .
There are few other factors which affect T g which does not have any generalization .
I just quickly go through that .
For example , if I have compare two symmetric substitution like two substitutes , a F verses 1 and substitutes a F ; the unsymmetrical have the higher T g .
This is the two example .
And now the Cis - trans isomer of diene polymer , they have different T g s .
Now , these are all specific examples .
No generalization can be possible .
So explanation , general explanation is little difficult to give .
And if the glass transition temperature also depend on the T g , sorry , tacticity of the homopolymers , and for example if you look at the T g of syndiotactic of poly methyl methacrylate is different than isotactic , whereas copolystyrene is not different .
So , what I will do , I will stop today and we will start in the next lecture .
Continuing with the methods for immobilization of enzymes , we shall be talking today about the entrapment methods .
So far we have discussed various methods under the category of adsorption including ionic binding and metal salt linkage , cross linking and covalent bond formation .
Entrapment methods are also a very large class of enzyme immobilization methods that are based on the occlusion of an enzyme within a constraining structure .
That means the enzyme molecules are entrapped within a definite region of a space ; it could be a lattice of a polymeric matrix or a semi permeable membrane .
This matrix within which the enzyme is entrapped must be tight enough to prevent the release of the protein and allow the substrate or product molecule to pass through the boundaries .
It means that when we have an enzyme which is entrapped within a gel matrix the gel should be porous enough so that within the pores it can retain the enzyme molecules which are large molecular weight in size of that of a protein but the porous structure must be such that the small molecular weight substrate or product molecules are allowed to pass through and therefore the reaction can be carried out .
On the other hand if the entrapped preparation is like a micro capsule which also consist of a semi permeable membrane boundary the permeability of the membrane must be such that the enzyme molecules are not allowed to be leaked out while the substrate and the product molecule can pass through easily .
Some of the important characteristics of these preparations is that only reactions involving relatively small substrate or product molecules can be carried out successfully using entrapped enzyme preparations .
Because the enzyme is entrapped it does not have any interactions or modifications or involvement or coupling of the amino acid residues of the protein molecules with that of the matrix of the immobilize enzyme preparation and therefore the sole force that keeps the enzyme molecules bound to the matrix is the porous network and purely by molecular size .
Therefore only small molecular weight substrate and products can be processed while the large molecular weight substrate or products cannot be processed using entrapped immobilized enzyme preparations .
The major advantage of this method is that it does not require any modification or involvements of the amino acids residues of the enzyme which results in the high yield and stability because there is no modification of the enzyme structure involved in the entrapment methods .
It is purely a physical restriction constraint of the enzyme molecule within a narrow region of a space and therefore the enzyme does not undergo any deactivation and usually the yields obtained by the method are quite high .
Second thing is that the micro environment of the enzyme can also be tailored to suite its stability .
While immobilizing the preparation , one can add substrate molecules or other stabilizing agents so that they are retained along with the enzymes and stable preparations can be obtained .
Two major types of entrapments methods that have been extensively followed are by gel entrapment .
That means you have a polymeric gel matrix and an enzyme molecule is entrapped within the lattices or interstitial spaces of these gel just by physical confinement .
There are varieties of methods to make the gel network .
We will discuss that and on the other hand the second method is microencapsulation where you tend to form a kind of a artificial cell with its boundary of a semi permeable membrane and the enzyme molecules are entrapped within this membrane and these micro capsules can be used as the immobilized enzyme preparations .
Looking at the first method that is the gel entrapment it involves entrapping the enzyme within the interstitial spaces of cross linked water soluble polymeric gels .
Look at some of the phrases which I mentioned ; cross linked water insoluble polymeric gels .
In most cases we start either with the monomer or a water soluble polymer .
We start with a monomer unit and only those cases where the polymerization can be carried out under mild reaction conditions in the presence of enzyme .
The monomer solution which is usually water soluble is mixed with the enzyme solution and conditions are created so that polymerization can take place under mild reaction conditions with the help of a catalyst or initiator or some other conditions and the network of polymeric gel is formed which is water insoluble and then the enzyme is entrapped within the interstitial spaces .
Or alternatively we take a water soluble polymer large molecular weight substance and mix the enzyme solution with this and the mixture is subjected to conditions by which the insolublisation takes place .
Therefore it could be either by change of solvent , it could be change of by certain ions , it could be by temperature ; the usual parameters which can induce insolubility or it can affect the solubility of the polymer .
The polymeric network can be obtained from monomers , oligomers or polymeric precursors by changing the solubility variables .
So there are two approaches by which these preparations are made by changing the solubility variables like solvent , temperature , pH and ionic strength or the cross linking reactions .
If it is a water soluble polymer , one can also induce cross linking by certain conditions so that it becomes water insoluble and the enzyme gets trapped into the matrix .
The purpose is if we start with water soluble polymer it will usually not have any cross linking .
It will be water soluble with lot of hydrophilic groups and the enzyme can easily mix with the solution .
Once you induce cross linking into it by any method , it could be by a cross linking bifunctional reagent like butyraldehyde , it could be ferric chloride .
Variety of methods has been employed and after cross linking is induced the whole network becomes water insoluble and the enzyme molecules are entrapped .
On the other hand when we are starting with a monomer unit which is water soluble , then to get water insoluble gel you include a cross linking agent .
These two parameters are in …. .. .
One is the degree of cross linking and the other is to change the solubility parameter .
The ultimate matrix must be insoluble in water and also it should be in a proper range of cross linking such that the porosity can be regulated .
Cross linking helps in a very significant manner to control the porosity of the matrix ; higher the cross linking smaller is the porosity .
One of the most commonly used methods is the poly acrylamide gel entrapment .
This is poly acrylamide gel entrapment .
More than 50 % of the total literature cited on entrapment methods would probably be devoted to polyacrylamide gel entrapment .
It was one of the earliest methods also because the poly acrylamide gel preparation was an existing methodology even for gel electrophoresis .
So we will use the same method to prepare an enzyme containing gels .
The method is very simple .
We start with an acrylamide monomer which is water soluble .
To this a cross linking reagent usually N , N - methylene bisacrylamide usually often called as BIS is added and an enzyme solution is mixed with it .
The three water soluble materials are mixed to which an initiator is added .
Number of initiator molecules can be used .
It could be ammonium persulphate or potassium per sulphate or riboflavin .
They are initiators ; that means it is a free radical polymerization .
So you need an initiator molecule which can initiate the free radical reaction and TEMED , N , N , N ’ , N ’ tetra methyl ethylene diamine is used as the catalyst .
The two parameters which are very important to control here is the absence of oxygen .
The presence of even trace of oxygen inhibits polymerization reaction .
So it is very important that all the reagents that have been used are free of oxygen .
If you bubble nitrogen through the reagents you can get them free of oxygen .
But even traces of oxygen can reduce degree of polymerization in the polymerization reaction .
The second parameter is that the reaction must be carried out at less then ten degree centigrade .
The reaction temperature while it will control the reaction rate it will carry out the reaction at a slow rate and it has also been seen in the polymerization reaction that slower the rate degree of the polymerization can be taken up to a higher level .
Secondly it is also important to keep the enzyme in a good state that is not to allow inactivation of the enzyme .
The reaction is exothermic and lot of heat is generated .
So you have to make arrangement for dissipation of heat so that the temperature can be maintained at less than ten degree centigrade and the enzyme is not deactivated .
It ’ s a very fast reaction .
The whole reaction will be over in a couple of minutes .
In a couple of minutes you get a polymeric network of chains .
It ’ s a three dimensional network .
These are the chains which are shown in the dotted lines and indicate the cross linkages which are vertical to the plane of the paper So the three dimensional network is formed and enzyme molecules are entrapped within the interstitial spaces which are created by the cross linkages that are maintained and you get a smooth solid block in the form of a gel .
The porosity of the gel can be maintained by the concentration of the cross linking agent that is BIS .
Temperature also can control the degree of polymerization and all the parameters can be optimized for a given condition so that the maximum yield of the enzyme activity is recovered at the end of the reaction .
You end up in a three dimensional network which is water insoluble and in the form of a block .
Here some of the cross linkages are shown ending with the dots .
These ones are perpendicular to the plane of paper to indicate a three dimensional network and the enzyme being entrapped within the space .
The conditions of concentration of the acrylamide monomer , the concentration of the cross linking agent , that is BIS , the reaction temperature are the three major parameters which control the degree of polymerization and porosity of the gel .
After the gel is formed , the gel is mechanically ruptured into small pieces in the form of a small granules or cut into small pieces and then can be used as a packing material in the reactors .
In addition to this another very common group of methods which has been used are the use of photocrosslinkable reagent prepolymers .
These are mostly oligomers which can be polymerized using UV light .
A large number of methods are based on the use of photocrosslinkable prepolymers .
I have shown here some of the reagents like ENT which is water soluble derivative of poly ethylene glycol , ENTP is a water insoluble derivative of polypropylene glycol and ENTB is a water insoluble derivative of polybutadiene .
PBM is malic polybutadiene and PU is polyurethane and these are the precursors of certain photocrosslinkable polymers .
These molecules can be polymerized using UV radiations in the presence of a photoinducer , a catalyst , and benzoin ethylether is used in most cases as an inducer for photocrosslinking .
These materials can be dissolved along with the enzyme and then polymerization can be started by exposing them to ultra violet light at 360nm for few minutes and then in few minutes the reaction is over and the gel preparation containing the enzyme molecule is made available .
Another group of entrapment methods , gel entrapment method rather , is from the long chain polymers .
There are two major approaches by which these gel entrapment preparations are made from long chain pre formed polymers .
In the two earlier methods we have talked about the use of a monomer and an oligomer a prepolymer .
On the other hand here we are using a ready made polymer .
The first method which is also a very commonly used method is ionotropic gelation in which the whole process of insolubilization of the polymer is based on ionic exchange .
The enzyme , water soluble enzyme is mixed with an aqueous solution of the appropriate polyelectrolyte .
Most of the polymers used here are polyelectrolytes which can be mixed with the enzyme solution and a typical preparation which has been reported is sodium alginate .
It is a polysaccharide , negatively charged polyelectrolyte .
This polyelectrolyte is then mixed with the enzyme solution and this mixture is then added drop wise with addition into a solution of counter ions .
The sodium is replaced by calcium .
Calcium has been most commonly used so instead of sodium alginate you end up in calcium alginate which is water insoluble .
While sodium alginate is water soluble polymer , it can mix with the enzyme solution and then this mixture is extruded through a fine syringe into a calcium chloride solution and agitated .
By the exchange of ions the sodium gets exchanged with the calcium , you get water insoluble beads .
One of the major advantages of this method is that while in the case of previous methods you get the block of the gel and the gel block has to be mechanically dispersed into a particular shape for use in a reactor , here you can prepare the beads , the immobilized enzyme preparation , almost in the bead form so that that can be directly used .
One of the disadvantages here is the stability of this material .
For example calcium alginate although insoluble in aqueous medium gets solubilised by certain ions like phosphate ions .
If your medium contains phosphate ions , calcium alginate will slowly get dislodged and you will end up in dissolution of immobilized preparation and sometimes instead of calcium , barium or aluminium is used as a counter ion .
Such methods are very commonly used not only for enzymes but even for some of other biocatalysts like …… cells , this provides a very viable method for immobilization .
Second method is based on precipitation .
That means you change certain conditions in a way that the mixture of the enzyme and the prepolymer changes the solubility behavior and gets precipitated .
Some of the natural synthetic polymers that are very commonly used are : collagen , gelatin and agarose .
Collagen and gelatin are proteins whereas agarose is a polysaccharide .
A large variety of natural polymers are used by changing one or more of the parameters in the solution .
Collagen which is a structure of protein , is found in the slaughter house waste .
Collagen can be taken mixed with the enzyme solution and you make a dispersion of the enzyme with the collagen solution .
You don ’ t really get a good solution .
Being a structural protein , you get a real dispersion of the enzyme .
This dispersion is then cast on a sheet so that you can get thin film of the enzyme entrapped in the collagen membrane .
To provide stability to this film usually this film is subjected to crosslinking either by butyraldehyde or by ferric chloride .
Different methods have been used ; so crosslinking becomes an important parameter to provide stability to the immobilized preparation .
Similarly in the case of gelatin , one can mix the gelatin solution with the enzyme solution and pull it .
Pulling will reduce the solubility and we will get a gel .
After the gel is formed then you can subject it to butyraldehyde to provide crosslinking and therefore get a permanently insoluble gel preparation .
The same applies to agarose which is also a polysaccharide and also can be converted into a gel by cooling and there are some other polymers including synthetic polymers which have been used by this mode into immobilized preparation .
Collagen is not so good .
It forms the dispersion with the enzyme molecule and a collagen method is not exactly like a gel as we consider a poly acrylamide gel or an agarose gel or any starch gel .
It is a dispersion which is cast into a thin film .
Dispersion of collagen and enzyme in water is spread over a film , thin film usually .
Preparation like this are made in the form of thin films and then to give the stability they are crosslinked and after it is crosslinked it becomes a permanent .
You just add the cross linking agent after a film has been made .
Yes algenic acid .
Another method , a very useful method , again for immobilizing mostly microbial cells is fiber entrapment .
The physical entrapment of an enzyme is achieved by dissolving a fiber forming polymer like cellulose triacetate which is water insoluble .
This is dissolved in a non - polar solvent like chloroform or carbon tetrachloride , methylenechloride and this organic solution of cellulose triacetate is then emulsified with the aqueous enzyme solution .
Stir the two solutions inorganic as well as the aqueous phase ; agitate it and you get a fine emulsion .
This time emulsion is extruded through a spinneret just like you make nylon fibers and pass through a fine spinneret and the extruded fibers or the filaments are then dipped into a liquid coagulant like toluene or petroleum ether .
When these fibers are passed through toluene , they get coagulated , the polymer gets coagulated with the water droplets , the aqueous droplet of enzyme being entrapped in the fiber .
This is a spinneret .
This is put into a trough containing toluene .
When it passes through toluene after residence time in toluene , the polymer cellulose triacetate gets coagulated ; it is no longer soluble and then the fiber that are formed contain the enzyme micro - droplets which was earlier emulsified into the solution of cellulose triacetate which are entrapped in the fibers .
Then these fibers can be used in a variety of modes in a reactor .
Even people have tried to make fabric out of immobilized cells which then can be used for variety of industrial applications .
The second group of entrapment method is on microencapsulation and in the case of micro encapsulation , as I mentioned earlier , the enzyme is enclosed within a semi permeable membrane ; polymeric membrane permeable to substrate and product .
Enzyme does not pass through but substrate or product must be able to pass through the membrane in the system .
One of the major advantages is that it provides extremely large surface area for the enzyme substrate complex and the enzyme substrate contact within a small volume .
But the preparations are too fragile because this semipermeable membrane is very , very thin and it provides you a very , very fragile preparation .
Therefore its use in a number of industrial reactors is probably very difficult because it will not be able to withstand the shear and the mechanical load which an industrial reactor for chemical processing will require .
But this method has been very extensively and very favorably used particularly for biomedical applications .
For example the references as I have listed here by Chand and associates , which was reported in 1971 had asparagine in nylon microcapsules .
In the preparation of nylon microcapsules , an aqueous solution of the enzyme and hydrophilic monomer like hexamethylene diamine is dissolved in a buffer .
This is emulsified in a water immiscible organic solvent which is cyclohexane , chloroform mixture .
To the emulsified monomer solution , you add another hydrophobic monomer dissolved in the same solvent .
Hydrophobic monomer , in this case is sebacoyl chloride .
At the interface the two monomers gets polymerized and the reaction gives you a polymer what we know as nylon .
So the chain continues and you get nylon .
Particularly the enzyme which was mixed with the hydrophilic monomer is entrapped within the microcapsule .
This method has been used very significantly for immobilizing an enzyme called asparaginase which is used as a therapeutic agent for persons suffering from leukemia .
One major advantage here is that the nylon molecule being non - immunogenic provides a much better material for putting into the human system .
Carbohydrates or proteins are known to generate immunogenic reactions in the body whereas nylon is relatively inert as far as the immunogenecity is concerned and these capsules have been used for treatment of leukemia .
For most of the patients suffering from leukemia one of the problems is their lack of asparagine .
They lose the asparaginase enzyme , the enzyme which hydrolyses the asparagine in the system .
While these methods have academic significance from the point of view of providing certain characteristics features but for industrial reactors they are not very suitable .
I found applications in only biomedical applications .
What you have done is initially you have taken a hydrophilic monomer and the enzyme solution in a buffer , in an aqueous buffer , mixed it into an organic solvent .
So you make a fine droplet , fine emulsion .
To this emulsion we add the hydrophobic monomer dissolved in the same solvent .
So at the interface of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic monomer they polymerize and the enzyme gets entrapped into and these microcapsules are very fine in size .
The size can be varied from almost about two to three microns to ten microns almost like an artificial cell , a yeast cell for example .
Almost they will be the size of yeast cells .
We have seen so far a large variety of immobilization methods .
If one has to really study various methods I think one must compare the various methods and to evaluate various methods for a particular job then these are the parameters which are needed to be looked into .
On the right hand side I have given you the various methods that we have talked about .
On the left hand side are the parameters which are important to be compared and there is no method absolutely reported in literature which can meet all the requirements .
There is no ideal immobilization method and each method has to be weighed in terms of its applicability and the parameters that are important are : method of preparation , binding force for example I have mentioned adsorption as a weak binding force as compared to covalent binding .
If you require a very strong binding force use covalent coupling .
Yield is a very important parameter .
Enzyme loading … .
per unit carrier how much of the enzyme can be loaded and it is something like specific activity of a soluble enzyme preparation .
That means in so much of protein what activity can be carried out ?
Similarly enzyme loading in terms of carrier loading .
Then the choice of carrier and in the choice of carrier the regeneration of the carrier is also associated .
The cost of the carrier and the regeneration capacity are directly linked .
The stability of the preparation and protection from microbial attack .
Most of the entrapment methods have a major advantage of protection from microbial attack because they are constrained within the four walls of a structure almost like microbial cells where all the enzymes or proteins are enclosed within a cell wall in the membrane and within a living cell the enzyme remains safe from microbial attack .
Similar situations can be looked from entrapment methods and finally the over riding factor often comes as cost .
So all the methods are mostly considered in terms of these parameters .
When we talk of the immobilization for industrial reactors the major factor is the cost and in terms of the cost it is desirable that when we produce them on a commercial scale using microbial cells , those enzymes which are intercellular in nature they could be used almost in the form of ….. ... .
You need not disrupt the cells and then isolate and purify the enzyme and then immobilize .
Because isolation , purification is a very cost intensive operation for intercellular enzymes .
So in many cases of intercellular enzymes efforts have been made to immobilize the whole cell itself and the immobilization of the whole cell is a desirable feature particularly in the case of intercellular enzymes .
A major application of immobilized cells has been in isomerisation of glucose to fructose and the process is only techno economically viable because it can be used in the form of immobilized cells .
If the enzyme , the glucose isomerase is an intercellular enzyme and if one has to really isolate , purify and then immobilize probably the process will not be viable .
Today the process is used industrially , commercially almost in half of the world wherever sucrose is not abundantly available , as a sweetener for glucose fructose mixture because the product cost is not very high .
Therefore the use of immobilized cells provides a very viable alternative .
The conditions that are imposed on the use of immobilized cells are that the cells should not contain the interfering enzymes catalyzing the side reactions .
That means for example if you are using glucose as a substrate for a particular reaction , then the cell should not contain the enzymes that can also act on glucose and produce the side effects .
Glucose is a substrate .
You will all agree that it is very difficult to look at the living cell or a microbial cell which will not have more than one enzyme and which will use glucose as substrate .
As in the very first reaction itself for example hexokinase will act on glucose as a substrate and produce the corresponding phosphorylated sugar .
So in that case the other alternative is that it should be feasible that other interfering enzyme if there are any it should be possible to inactivate them by some pretreatment which does not influence the desired enzyme .
In the case of glucose isomerase or the immobilized glucose isomer is the form of … .
we take advantage of the thermal stability of the enzyme .
The enzyme glucose isomerase is a very thermo tolerant enzyme of the order that the optimum temperature of the glucose isomer ranges between 70 to 80ºc and therefore you can take the cells give a heat treatment whereby most of the other enzymes which are able to act on glucose are inactivated but glucose isomerase still remains active and use that heat treated cells for immobilization .
So the cell should not contain any interfering enzyme .
There are many preparations like for example preparation of fumaric acid from aspartic acid where the enzymes are too specific and usually there are no other enzymes present in the cell which will be able to utilize those substrate .
Then the substrate product should also pass through the cell membrane .
That is the major constraint because the enzyme is located within the cell .
So the cell membrane should be able to transport the substrate and the product across the boundary otherwise you cannot make the reaction feasible .
For immobilized cell although theoretically almost all methods , variety of methods starting from adsorption to entrapment have been used sparingly , the bulk of the methods that had been used rather …. .. on industrial scale are based on adsorption or entrapment .
Most of the entrapment methods very commonly have been used to entrap the microbial cells and as you will notice that entrapment within calcium alginate beads , polyacrylamide gel and cellulose acetate fibers have been commonly used methods for immobilizing .
The method remains the same as we have talked about the enzyme molecules .
The entrapment of cells is much more because of their larger size than the enzyme molecule .
Their retention in the entrapped method is far superior compared to the soluble enzyme .
There are four adsorption methods which are based mostly on ionic binding because most of the cells have negative charge on the surface and therefore any positively charged matrix can be used to adsorb the cells on to the surface .
These adsorb preparations are usually in dynamic equilibrium .
That means if it is a growing cell then part of the cell will attach and some of the cells will be leaking out also .
But in the case of non - viable cells usually entrapment methods are the method of choice .
We must here also probably make a distinction between living and non - viable cells .
Living cells are usually used in those cases of bio - conversion processes where we require a series of enzyme reaction .
More than one enzyme reactions is involved usually with a co factor regeneration that means a metabolic path way is involved with a metabolite to be produced or else if a single enzyme is desirable then it is always desirable to use non - viable cells .
For living cells usually adsorption has been a method which had been very commonly used while for non - viable cells , entrapment is the method which has been most widely used .
But the technical details of methodology for immobilization remain the same as in the case of enzymes .
When we talk of immobilization of microbial cells we could think of the cells which are viable , which can multiply .
These multiplying cells or living cells are needed in those cases where the process requires a full metabolic path way which means a series of enzyme reactions which are interlinked for co - factor regeneration or for some other metabolite I mean uptake and production .
In those cases living cells are used and usually these living cells have been immobilized by adsorption method because when they are living on the adsorption method although it is a method which regularly leaks out the cells from surface but then the new cells which are growing during growth phase they can also bind to the surface and then … .
in a dynamic balance .
On the other hand if a single enzyme catalyzed reaction is the desired feature , then non - viable cells are desirable and they can be immobilized safely by one of the entrapment methods that we have talked about .
Having looked into a variety of immobilization methods , we should also have a code to characterize an immobilized enzyme preparation by any method .
Somebody has reported an immobilization method for a particular biocatalyst .
There has to be a common feature by which the immobilized preparation can be characterized so that the purpose of characterization is that the method should be reproducible by anybody .
Minimum information should be provided so that anybody who wants to reproduce the method can use it for further work .
Some of these steps which I have listed here provide this .
For example when we say general description I am talking of the reaction scheme that is the reaction which you are looking at catalyzing ; then the source of enzyme - which enzyme and from what source has been used ; carrier .
These three things must be clearly outlined .
What is the reaction we are looking at ?
That means also involves which enzyme we want and what are the source of enzyme and the carrier which is required to be used for any method .
The second step is method of immobilization .
That means how do you prepare ; what are the reaction conditions ?
That means the reaction conditions and particularly more important is yield , loss of activity and the activity left in the supernatent .
So all that information must be provided in the methods of preparation .
Then the characteristics feature is physical - chemical characterization which means the biocatalyst shape , mean particle diameter or wet particle diameter .
That means after swelling what is the swelling behavior of the particle and the compression behavior in the columns and abrasion .
If it is to be required to be used in the …… .
reactor the minimum …. .. velocity and all those properties must be identified for a particular immobilized enzyme preparation and then we report any method .
Finally kinetics and stability of immobilized biocatalyst a very important feature which probably dictates the choice of the immobilized enzyme preparation .
As far as kinetics is concerned , as we have seen for the soluble enzyme , the substrate concentration versus initial reaction velocity that means the effect of substrate concentration on initial reaction velocity was the major kinetic characterization of soluble enzyme which gives you information about km , Vm and other kinetic parameters and normally by convention we represent the kinetic parameter for an immobilized enzyme or immobilized biocatalyst by k ’ m and V ’ m .
Prime is added just to indicate that we are reporting an immobilized preparation , just as a convention .
That information must be known and the kinetic characterization will imply that the km and Vm values for an immobilized enzyme preparation might undergo change during immobilization .
Other than the reaction kinetics there are other physical parameters which get involved particularly diffusion and partitioning , which we will discuss in detail .
Diffusional effects , then degree of conversion versus residence time at different initial substrate concentration , the reactor performance profile and finally the operational and storage stability .
Data on all these parameters must be provided to characterize the particular immobilized enzyme preparation .
We have so far discussed the first three parameters we will discuss this in our future discussion on the kinetics of immobilized enzyme.We stop with this .
Welcome back to this course on Polymer Chemistry and today we will continue our discussion on Radical Chain Polymerization .
In this lecture , I planned to cover kinetic chain length and the molecular weight of the polymer produced in radical chain polymerization .
And then I will discuss several or several different possible chain transfer reactions and their implications in terms of molecular weight and rate of polymerization .
Before I begin , just let us recap the discussion we had on radical chain polymerization in last two lectures , lecture 9 and 10 .
We begin our discussion with a general feature of chain polymerization , how chain polymerization compares with step polymerization .
And then we discussed how a monomer structures determines it is feasibility towards undergoing polymerization , polymerization reactions towards a initiator , different kind of initiator radical cationic or anionic .
And then we found out that during chain polymerization it is always head tail arrangement , head tail head tail type arrangements is always exclusively preferred .
We discussed different types of radical initiators , thermal initiators , photochemical initiators , redox initiators .
We also discussed different types of monomers or types of monomers , which can be polymerized in radical chain polymerization mechanism and which are the types of monomers , which cannot be polymerized or it will difficultly polymerized in radical chain polymerization .
And we talked about that , not all the radicals generated either by redox reaction or by thermal decomposition of any initiator species or by some other means , actually initiate a polymer chain part of which get lost due to some side reactions .
So , the fraction of the initiators produced during the decomposition of the thermal initiator or some other process , which actually initiate the radicals , we call the terms initiator efficiency .
And , you also discussed different steps involved in a radical chain polymerization and kinetics of radical chain polymerization .
And in that way , we found the dependency of polymerization rate on initiator concentration as well as dependency of polymer rate on monomer concentration .
Now , let us begin or continue our discussion on molecular weight , molecular weight of the polymer produced in radical chain polymerization .
Now , to start the discussion on molecular weight , we defined a term called kinetic chain length nu , which is which is the number of monomers polymerized per each radicals , that initiated the polymer chain .
We can write number of monomer that polymerized , divided by the number of radicals that initiated polymer chain .
Considering the time , we can say that , the top one is the rate of polymerization , rate of disappearance of monomers and the denominator is rate of formation of the radicals , which is nothing but rate of initiation reaction .
So , we can write rate of polymerization divided by rate of initiation , now at steady state we knew that we know by this time , that R i is equals to the rate of termination .
So , we can write nu as R p rate of polymerization by rate of termination , rate of polymerization given by k p M dot .
M dot is the concentration of all the radical species present , all the summation of the concentration , all the propagating radical and this is k t M dot square , or I can write simply it is .
Now , we know from that steady state condition , where R i is R t .
In the last lecture we found , that the value of M dot in case of a thermally induced polymerization , is given by f k d I by k t to the power half .
So , we can now write nu k p M k d k t to the power half from the last expression .
The what is the importance of kinetic chain , why we are discussing or defining a term kinetic chain length nu , we will now know that , degrees of polymerization is directly proportional to nu .
Exactly we will know that , degree average number average degrees of polymerization is equals to b nu , where b is the number of initiator residue average number of initiator residue per polymer chain .
So , if we if kinetic chain length goes up , which means number average degrees of polymerization will go up , hence the molecular weight will also will go up .
So , that is a importance of kinetic chain length , that if it is goes up or goes down , then accordingly the molecular weight goes up or goes down .
Now , how the molecular weight or degrees of average number average degrees of polymerization related to nu , it is twice nu , if the chains or the propagating radical terminates by coupling and it goes to nu , if the termination happen by disproportionation .
Now , I hope you can you can get this , if we just look at this , that if I have a if I have a propagating radical having a active species here , if I have a if I have a radical here at the end of a propagating chain , I have another radical at the end of the propagating chain .
This has a average number of molecules nu , this also have average number of monomer molecules nu .
Now , if they gets terminated by coupling reaction , the polymer which is formed here , that will have number of degrees of polymerization or total number of monomer present in that chain , will be twice nu .
Now , if this two propagating radical collide , interact and get terminated of a deformed dead polymer by this propagation reaction , then you get two polymer chain .
Two dead polymer chain , which will have again the same number of monomer molecules , which were present in the chain before the termination reactions .
Let us take a example , you know simple example and see whether we can visualize this more .
Now , let us we start a reaction at t is equal to 0 , I have a say 1000 mole of 1000 moles of monomer M and say 10 moles of I , initiator molecules .
Now at time t , we stop the reaction and we found that , there are 400 moles of monomer still remaining .
So , how many moles of monomers has reacted to form polymers , is basically 600 moles of monomers reacted to form polymer chains .
Now , if I consider that I t , the consideration of or the number of moles of number of moles of let us do it in the next page .
At time t , we have 6 moles initiator remaining , which means four moles have been consumed .
Each initiator molecule produces , if we consider a thermally initiated polymerization , each I produce 2 R dot .
So , there are 8 moles of radicals produced during this time frame , during the polymerization reaction .
Now , if say 75 percent of this radical has initiated a polymer chain , so efficiency f is 75 percent that means , 6 moles of radical actually initiated polymer chain .
So , number of , what is nu ?
Total number of monomers polymerized , which is 600 moles that is a number of monomers polymerized .
How many number of radicals has initiated polymer chains , that 6 moles so that is 100 .
So , 100 is the value of kinetic chain length that means , 100 monomers has , in a average every chain before termination on average every chain before it undergoes termination reaction , which we call kinetic chains has a number of monomer units of 100 .
So , is clear , 100 means the number of monomers on average , which is present in a polymer chain before it undergoes termination reaction .
We call that chain as a kinetic chain , kinetic chain have 100 monomers .
Now , what will happen this 6 moles of , there are 6 moles of chains before termination before termination or otherwise 6 moles of kinetic chains .
Now they will get terminated and form polymer molecules , dead polymer molecules .
Let us assume that , two moles of this , become dead or on the weight termination reaction by disproportionation reaction .
So , how many molecules , how many chains polymer chains , 2 moles because each kinetic chain 2 of 2 of the chain to 2 chains will come and react and form 2 dead chains .
So , 2 moles kinetic chain will produce 2 moles , now rest of the 4 moles , if I consider that they undergo coupling to get terminated , then they will also form 2 moles of polymers .
Because , each 2 mole kinetic chain will come and interact and form one polymer so it get 4 4 moles of polymers .
So , what is the average degrees of polymerization , number of monomers polymerized divided by number of polymer chains .
Because , this is a total number of monomers polymerized and this is the number of chains formed so that will give the number of average number of monomers present in a single chain .
So , that is 600 by 4 1.5 so that is nu is .
So , that is 1.5 nu , which is 1.5 multiplied by 100 , 150 600 by 4 .
You can get same number , if I consider how many number of , we have in the mixture .
In the mixture , we have 2 chains or 2 moles of chains , X n bar with nu and 2 moles of chains with X n bar of 2 nu .
So , again on average , we have 2 chains or 2 moles of chains with nu degrees of polymerization , 2 into 2 nu divided total number of chains is 4 .
So , 1.5 nu again you get this same number so fine so you will know how the average degrees of polymerization is related to the kinetic chain .
Now , what is 1.5 , if you we can get this number , if we consider the number of , how many number of initiator residue present per chain .
Now , if I have one kinetic chain like this , the one end , this end you have a one initiator residue , which initiated the chain .
If I react with another kinetic chain , and form a dead polymer by coupling reaction , then you have a polymer chain , which have two residues .
So , a polymer formed by coupling of two kinetic chains will have two initiator residues whereas , if this undergo disproportion and form two different polymer chain , then each polymer will have one initiator residues .
So , in this case , this two moles of chain which underwent disproportionation reaction , you have total number of , this has each one has one residues initiator residues and this has two initiator residues .
You have 6 moles of kinetic chains so initiator residues will have 6 moles , each kinetic residues have 1 moles and you have chains polymer chains , 4 moles .
So , number of initiator residues per chain , per polymer chain is 6 by 4 is 1.5 .
So , this number is nothing but the number of initiator residues per chain , which we call or term as b .
Now , we can get a more general expression of b , if we consider a more general example .
See , if I have n is the number of kinetic chains , which means propagating radicals and of this a n , a is the fraction of this propagating radicals , undergoing termination by coupling .
So , total number of initiator residues in the polymer sample is , n is the number of kinetic chain so each kinetic chain will have one initiator residues .
So , total number of initiator residues in the sample is n and total number of chains , polymer chains , polymer means dead chains is , a is the fraction .
So , n a is the number and if they are going termination by coupling so it is two of them produce one chain .
So , n a will produce n a by two chains and rest ( 1 minus a ) , which is undergoing termination by disproportionation , they will form one minus a by n chain .
So , average number of initiator residues for polymer chain is given by , n n a by 2 plus ( 1 minus a ) n 2 by 2 by a , this is we term as b .
So , if I know if I know X n and X n is given by b nu so from experiment if I know the molecular weight above sample , if I know the molecular weight and total total amount total gram , then we know number of chains as well .
And if we get the concentration of the initiator residues , then you can divide by the number of chains to get b .
So , we from that , we can know or experiment the determine b and if we know b , we can find out a or number of fractional chain , which are undergoing termination by coupling .
And 1 minus a are the number of chains , which kinetic chains , which has undergone termination reaction by the disproportionation reaction .
Now , in this case , we go back and see how we define the average degrees of polymerization , x n in this chain polymerization is a number of monomer polymerized by the number of polymer chain .
What is the definition of X n , is the number of monomer units present average number of monomer unit present per chain , which is obviously will given by number of monomer unit consumed or polymerized divided by number of polymer chain , simple .
Now , remember in the step polymerization case , what was a X n bar or average degrees of polymerization , again it was number of monomer molecules polymerized divided by the number of molecules present at the end of the reaction .
We have used that formula , number of molecules present at the end of the reaction that means , in the step polymerization case , we have considered every molecules present at the end of the polymerization is part of the polymer sample .
Because , there is no distinct no boundary between , you know in this case chain we have monomers and high molecular polymers , there is nothing intermediate .
So , we can easily remove the monomer molecules , which we can discuss the monomer molecules and we can only count the polymer chains .
But , in case of step of polymerization , we are talking about number of molecular present that means , each one each molecules whether it is a monomer or dimmer or trimmer , that also are in those are also included part of polymer polymer sample .
So , when we talking about polymer distribution , it contains the monomer , dimmer , trimmer sample as well .
So , in case , we find in a step polymerization , that our polydispersity is less than 2 , in spite of having a high molecular weight .
What could be the reason , we have found that in case of step polymerization , the polydispersity index is always two .
Theoretical polydispersity is always two , if we get a high enough molecular weight because that given by 1 plus p , p should be almost one to get a high molecular weight .
So , ideal theoretical polydispersity index should be two but if we find some time , that even in spite of getting large molecular weight , our polydispersity index is lower .
That could be because if we do the reaction in the solution and during the precipitation of the polymers , the monomer or the low molecular weight fractions remain in the solution .
So , what you finally measuring , what we finally measuring the polydispersity of the sample , which is the void of the monomer , dimmer , trimmer , which are suppose to be part of the polymer mixture , that is the reason we might get a narrower distribution .
So , that is the fundamental one fundamental difference between chain polymers and step polymers , how do we calculate or how do you understand , what the average degrees of polymerization is or the average molecular weight average number average molecular weight is .
In this case chain case , we do not consider the monomers , whether in the step polymers case , we consider every molecule present at the end of the reaction .
So , if we got this , and you can write b R p by R t or R p by R t by b .
So , this is the average number of , we can get it from this and you know , unless the monomer is the monomer is sterically crowed .
If we are talking about a coupling reaction , then two radical chain ends has to come and collide each other .
Now , unless the monomers is sterically crowded or they have a easily abstractable beta hydrogen , in majority cases they undergo termination by coupling reaction like styrene , acrylonitrile , methyl acrylate .
They are not very sterically hindered and either they have a beta hydrogen for elimination whereas , in case of methyl methacrylate because it has a beta hydrogen , which can be easily eliminated .
It undergoes termination reaction both by coupling as well as by disproportionation reaction , and as we increase the temperature , the fraction of termination fraction of disproportionation termination increases as we increase we increase the temperature .
So , till now , we have been considering the termination of this propagating radical by bi molecular interaction between two propagating radical , either by coupling .
Now , there could be another type of reactions , by which propagating radical or a kinetic chain can get terminated , which is transfer reactions .
So , now , let us discuss transfer reaction so if I have a propagating radical M n dot .
It can react with the third molecule and form M n X plus A dot so here one kinetic chain , which was suppose to continue one chain is getting broken by reacting with X A and forming a new radical , now this new radical can initiate another chain like this .
So , from one radical you have be discussing that , we had one kinetic chain , in this case from one radical , we have 1 dead polymer plus 1 another kinetic chain .
So , basically for a given number of monomers polymerized , the number of chains at the end of the polymerization is no more .
Because , 1 kinetic chain is getting broken down to 1 dead polymer and a another kinetic chain , which means , this is a chain breaking reaction .
As a result of this , the average number average degrees of polymerization or the molecular weight will definitely come down .
What are X A is , X A could be the initiator molecules , it could be the monomer itself to the solvent molecules , it could be the polymer itself or it could be any external agent .
External agent , which are could be added added deliberately from outside or it could be present as a impurities and we call some time call as this chain transfer agent or CTA .
So , give let us give some examples of this transfer reaction , when X A is initiator say , I have a reaction of acrylonitrile .
It can react with say , this case the benzoyl peroxide is initiator and it can check up this and from now , this can again react with the monomer and initiate another kinetic chain .
There could be some peroxides or hydro peroxides , which also when act as a initiator , they participated in chain transfer reaction and resulting decrease of molecular weight , example of X A is monomer methyl methacrylate dot , it is not the methyl methacrylate .
So , this is example of , where you are getting a chain transfer by the monomer itself .
Examples , where X A is solvent , if I take carbon tetrachloride , then it can take up chloride and form CCl 3 dot .
X A being polymer , consider poly ethylene , you have another chain , it could be dead chain dead polymer .
Now , it can abstract this hydrogen and form these dead chain , and you have a new polymer , where you have a radical generated in between not the end .
Now , it can undergo further polymerization from here and form a chain here so it can undergo here and form a chain .
So , you may have a branching here so if transfer happen within polymer , you get branching .
Similarly , if this can back bite this can back bite and abstract 1 hydrogen from here , producing C C and a CH dot here , now this can react with monomer giving branches .
So , in this case , if the chain transfer happen with another polymer molecule the two thing happening is , one you are getting branches and another important thing particularly for this case is that , X n bar does not change here , no change .
You have started with 2 polymer chain when a transfer happened , you have same 1 kinetic chain and 1 polymer dead polymer chain .
In this case , you have 1 kinetic chain , intra molecular back biting you are resulting it , one kinetic chain so the number of chains in this case does not change .
This is a special case of chain transfer , where because of chain transfer , the molecular weight does not change but it results in branching of the linear polymers .
Examples of deliberately added chain transfer agent is like H S C 4 H 9 , if you are considering a reaction with styrene , this can initiate further chain .
So , what we just now learned we have learned what are chain what are chain transfer reaction and what are the different types of chain transfer agent could be possible , it could be initiator , it could be monomer , it could be a transfer agent , to be solvent in all this case , except the chain transfer to the polymers .
You are generating more chains at the end of the polymerization , which means that you are breaking a chain and as a result the molecular weight or the number average degrees of a polymers , polymerization is lower than , if there was no transfer reaction present .
If I can write a general reaction like this , this is the rate constant for transfer reaction and this is rate constant for the subsequent initiation a propagation reaction with the a dot molecule .
So , we can write for monomer , we can write rate of transfer monomer given by , k transfer monomer M dot M .
For initiator , we can write similar transfer initiator , k transfer initiator m dot I similarly , we can write for solvent , CTA and so .
So , in general , we can write rate of chain transfer is rate constant for transfer M dot X A , now there could be 4 possibilities 4 possibilities , this is the rate constant for the transfer reaction .
Now a radical propagating radical can react with the monomer , which corresponds to k p , rate of polymerization and it can react with a transfer agent , which is your rate constant for transfer reaction .
And when this is new radical is formed , this initiate a another new chain polymerization , with rate polymerization rate of rate constant k a .
Now , case 1 k to k p and k transfer transfers much lower than the propagation so what happen , what is the effect on rate of polymerization .
Rate of polymerization nothing but rate of disappearance or rate of consumption of monomers , now if this new radical formed for transfer reaction , they also consuming monomer in the same rate .
Obliviously , rate of polymers polymerization does not change so no change , what happen to molecular weight , obviously decreased .
Because , chain transfer always breaks the chain and the name we gave for this type of reaction is normal normal chain transfer .
Now , case 2 is again , k is similar to k p and k transfer is much higher than k p so R p rate of polymerization , again no change .
Because , new radical form is also consume in monomer in same rate molecular weight because the number of transfer reactions rate constant for transfer reaction , is much higher than the chain propagation reaction .
So , the number of chains undergoing transfer reaction is much more many more so the molecular weight drop significantly , it large decrease in the molecular weight and we call this as telomerization .
The third case is , k the new rate of polymerization with the radical form due to transfer reaction is lower than k p but rate of transferring rate constant for transfer reaction is much lower than the rate constant for the original polymerization reaction .
In this case we got , this rate is lower than chain polymerization , rate of polymerization come down .
So , as the molecular weight and we call this as retardation , whether is fourth case thus the worst case , where k is lower than k p and k transfer is higher than k p .
In this case , because of this , rate comes down and because of this , molecular weight has large drop .
So , both large decrease in the molecular weight as well as the decrease the large decrease in the rate of polymerization and this we term as degradative chain transfer .
So , basically under reaction , you get extremely low molecular weight polymers are oligomers and that to the rate of consumption rate of reaction of the monomers happen must lower .
In this case , in the telomerization case , rate of polymerization is fast the monomer is reacted much at the same rate , as if there was no transfer reaction but the molecular weight drops .
So , for a given time , you are getting illed , number of polymers you are getting more but the rate at which polymers monomers is reacting is similar as the original rate , for the molecular weight drop significantly .
So , now , write the kinetic expressions , now we are found that , this is the this is the expressions gives the average degrees of polymerization without any transfer reaction , where only the termination is due to either coupling or this propagation .
And b is the number average number of initiated residues per polymer chain at the end of the reaction .
So , if a talk about transfer reaction , that include the other reactions , which by which termination takes place , which are other rates , that transfer by the monomer rate of transfer , by initiated rate of transfer , by solvent or rate of transfer by the C T H , chain transfer .
Now we are not writing rate of transfer by polymers because as you seen that polymers , they do not contribute in terms of decreasing the number of molecular weight of the polymer .
So , we are not considering the rate for chain transfer in polymers case , so if I can write 1 over X bar , I can write R t by b by R p , similarly R transfer mono by R p and so on , other terms .
This is 1 over X n 0 , which means , that have number average degrees of polymerization reactions of any transfer reaction and you can write the rate expression for individual rates .
So , k transfer is given by rate constant transfer monomer , M dot M by k p M dot M plus , if I talk about the initiated then , k transfer initiated M dot I k p M dot M plus others , 1 over X n 0 n by k p plus k transfer I by k p I by M so on .
Now , this is the rate of transfer rate constant for transfer by the original rate of propagation is , we are writing transfer coefficient or transfer coil constant .
So , this is the transfer constant for chain transfer constant for monomer , this is chain transfer constant for the initiator , similarly for solvent , we can write C S solvent by M plus C CTA , CTA by M .
Now , this is mayo equation so any increase in the right hand side , anything which increases the value of right hand side , will decrease the molecular weight .
So , any absence of any transfer reaction , you get the highest molecular weight , which is basically the molecular weight we get in absence of transfer reactions .
Now , just look at this transfer once , typically in normal cases , the transfer to monomer and initiator are very negligible .
They did they generally do not take place and unless we had a transfer agent from outside deliberately all the impurities present , this also does not contribute too much .
So , actually the main contribution for chain transformations chain transfer reaction is , the solvent so whether this might be significant for some particular cases , for this is very important for majority of the radical chain polymerization reactions .
So , let us discuss little more about this terms S and so basically for a given concentration monomer and solvent this is the value of C S will determine the chains transfer reactions in terms , which will determine the value of the molecular weight of the chains getting produced in this reactions .
Now , if I go and look this M n M n dot chain one propagating radical , they can react with a monomer , which is k p and it can react with X X A it could be solvent in others , which is basically the transfer .
Now , this produces again M n bar M n 1 plus if we write , and this produce A bar plus X M n X .
Now , whether a chain transfer will happen and if it is happen how extent , it will determine by the reactivity compression between the monomer and the chain transfer agent of the solvent here .
And also , the stability of this M n dot or A dot , if it is more stable , then it will be this reaction will be dominating over the original propagation reaction .
If it is this M n dot , which is the original propagations radical is more stabile , then obviously , this will be more preferred reaction over transfer reaction .
If the reactivity of the original radical propagating radical is very high , then it cannot distinguish that extent and other weight , even if there is a difference in the reactivity of these two molecules towards this .
Because , this is highly reactive , it will react both m and this , if it is less reactive , then the more reactive between this two will react with this .
If it is very reactive , then both of them will react , if it is low react less reactive , then between this two which is more reactive , that will react with this .
So , that reaction will be prominent preferred , let us take example and see whether we can grass this .
Let us consider examples like benzene , we are talking about solvent .
Let us consider X A as solvent so benzene cyclohexane , toluene , Methyl benzene , isopropyl benzene and tertiary butyl benzene .
Now , it just react with M n dot and undergo a transfer reaction obviously , this is a hydrogen , which will abstract , Slide this is the hydrogen it will abstract from here .
And between this case , this is the hydrogen is more recently abstractable and in this case , it is this hydrogen is abstractable and this case , this hydrogen is abstract able and this case , there is no hydrogen here so this hydrogen , which is more abstractable .
So , what is the resulting radicals form in this case , this radical , this radical dot now , from your basic knowledge of organic chemistry , you know which what is the order of stability of this radical .
Now , the most stable radical is , it will participate in the transfer reaction in more extent , the lower is the if it is lower , then it will participate in the transfer reaction in lower extent .
So , what is the value if I .
So , what we will do in the next lecture , let us start from this page and look at the value of this C S transfer constant and is know , the higher the value of C S , the more the solvent participate in the transfer reaction so lower would be the molecular weight of the resulting polymer .
So , let us stop for this class this lecture now , and we will start from this page in the next lecture immediately .
This course as you know , deals with one of the largest group of biomolecules what we know as enzymes .
You are familiar with number of biomolecules like carbohydrates , lipids , proteins .
This enzyme falls into the category of proteins and the course will cover various aspects of enzymes , particularly in relation to their application as a biocatalyst in the process industries .
I think one of the very basic issues which come to mind is that why do we study enzymes as a separate class ?
In addition to your study of various biomolecules in other courses like Biochemistry , we have separate course on enzymes and some of these aspects I will be dealing in today ’ s lecture , which will basically be of introductive nature and also give you the scope of this course .
The first issue as to why we study enzymes opens up many features of enzyme molecules and the first and probably the most important is their role in a living cell or their role in the realm of biotechnology as a whole .
If you look at the basic definition or a very broad operational definition of biotechnology it deals with the application of scientific and engineering principles to the processing of materials by biological agents to provide goods and services .
Here I like you to mark the term biological agents and these biological agents cover microbial cells , cellular organelles , enzymes , may be other parts of the cells like membranes in a variety of biological material that can be used as a catalyst in process industries .
That is the upcoming feature of biotechnology and among these groups of biocatalyst enzymes play a very significant role .
If you go a little deeper into the various activities of a living cell besides looking at the industrial application , a living cell is a very complex entity .
It carries out all functions of any chemical process plant that you have known or you can conceive .
Most complex chemical processing plant say for example petrochemical complex where the petroleum is fractionated into various products and I like to give you a very simplified analogy of a living cell to that of a chemical process plant .
The cell does a variety of functions that is crushing and grinding , transport of materials , power generation , control of information , transmission of information and then release of finish products to the user client .
All these functions are also basically carried out by a living cell .
Now the key issue is that all these functions in the living cell , may it be a microbial cell , may it be a plant cell or it might be an animal cell , they are mediated by the catalyst known as enzymes .
Therefore the enzymes play a very central role in the function of living cells or in other words you can say that they are one of the most important executives in a living cell .
Even disturbance in one of the enzyme catalysed reactions can lead to some abnormality in the cell function .
We are familiar with many of the diseases which are seen when one of the enzymes stops functioning .
Similarly in case of a living cell if the enzyme system fails many of the processes can be disturbed ultimately leading to the life cycle of the cell itself .
It is such an important component it becomes important to understand how they perform those reactions and how they manage the integrity of whole cell .
The most significant part is that they regulate the various functions of the cell in such an accurate manner probably no other control system in any chemical process plant can think of .
There is a perfect control , fine tuning of the enzyme activities as per the desired requirements and we also know that the cells are energetical , in terms of material consumption are very efficient systems and wastage is minimum .
The energy is generated to the required level ; materials are stored in case they are not needed .
All those functions are a key part of the living cell and all these functions are attributed to the function of enzymes and that is where we get to understand enzymes in a more detail fashion .
Also we must appreciate that the cells , making these functions possible , carry out a large variety of reactions .
They can range from hydrolysis to polymerization .
We are all familiar of how the different components or molecules or intermediates in a living cell are synthesized .
They all take place through a series of chemical reactions .
These reactions could be hydrolysis could be polymerization , could be epoxidation , could be reduction and so on .
A whole lot of chemical reactions do take place in a living cell .
The same scenario is that even a chemical process industry depends on a whole lot of chemical reactions which are catalyzed either spontaneously or with the use of catalyst .
The analogy lies that the reactions that are catalyzed by the enzymes in a living cell if they are carried out in an industrial atmosphere with perfect energetically economical situation , environmentally friendly conditions we have a good friend in enzymes and that is again another basis of use of enzymes in the process industries and also the possibility of studying them in such a great detail .
If you look at some of the aspect of enzymes and the process via catalyst , a very broad picture which refers to the role of enzymes as the bio catalyst , we must be aware that all these enzymes functions at the ambient conditions at the conditions at which living cells are known to live .
There might be some exceptions .
The organisms that are found under very extreme conditions are exceptions but most of the organisms that live under ambient conditions produce or they provide us enzymes which can function under mild reaction conditions .
That is the basis of their energetic efficiency .
That means the energy requirement of those reactions they catalyze could be very meager .
They have high turn over number .
When we discuss the reaction mechanism we will see that they are very efficient catalyst and when I say very efficient catalyst our counter part to compare is the chemical catalyst .
There are a large number of reactions which can be catalyzed both by enzymes as well as by chemical catalyst and the subtle mechanisms that are involved in the enzymatic catalysis make them very efficient catalyst meaning a high turn over number or a significant reduction in the energy of activation of reaction .
The very characteristic feature of enzyme is their specificity .
That means for any given reaction you need a specific enzyme and such specificity has both advantages as well as disadvantages .
It is advantageous in the sense that specificity will bring in lack of any byproducts because it will not act on any of the other substrate molecule which are present as additions or contaminant in the …… stream and you will only be reacting the desired substrate and converting it to product .
On the other hand the disadvantage is from industrial point of view .
You cannot produce them in very large quantity because you require small quantities of catalyst for specific reactions .
If one catalyst works on a variety of reactions the life is simple as happens in the case of chemical catalyst .
For example vanadium pentoxide or colloidal platinum can act as oxidation catalyst for n number of reactions or Raney nickel for hydrogenation .
Whatever has to be hydrogenated it can be used .
But the same scenario doesn ’ t happen .
You need a very specific enzyme and that brings in some sort of disadvantage as far as their role as industrial catalyst is concerned .
Two of the definitely undesirable features of an enzyme as catalyst is they are relatively fragile in nature and with very mild deviations from their normal operating conditions they can be deactivated .
The whole function is dependent upon a very subtle conformation .
This conformation is result of not only covalent interactions but of a large number of non covalent interactions which can be disturbed very easily and that is why the deactivation of enzymes can occur and deactivation from industrial point of view is some kind of a loss .
The other factor is cost which is again an undesirable feature which probably applies to any commodity we want to use for industrial purposes .
We will always like to choose a commodity which is less expensive and does the job and because the enzymes are produced in small amounts by the living cell and the only source of enzyme to us are living cells and they are synthesized in very small quantities .
So obviously their cost per unit quantity is comparably very high and coupled with their stability it becomes an expensive proposition .
But we are also aware of the some of recent developments in biotechnology , molecular biology and other sciences which involve isolation , purification , as well as stabilization .
The costs have been brought down , the concentration of the enzyme protein which can be synthesized has gone up and this situation is changing .
Another very significant equation as far as enzymes as processed via catalysts are concerned is between availability and applications .
We saw that they carry out lot a large number of reactions .
But although in a living cell various enzymes , which carry out these reactions are available their availability in large quantities for commercial applications are limited .
As matter of fact only those enzymes which are required in bulk , when I say bulk I am referring to at least , if not tons , quintals many of them in tons really , they cannot be produced on a mass scale and their availability for commercial applications is limited .
There are certain classical examples of amylases , glucoisomerase , cellulase , lipase , proteases , which are the enzymes that are produced in bulk and are available in large quantity .
The other part is because of their bulk production the cost has also come down and become reasonable for commercial applications .
The issue of availability is very intrinsically linked with the applications of enzymes .
Unless applications emerge one will not like to produce them in large quantities .
The paradox remains .
The applications do not emerge till they are available in large quantity .
There are a large number of examples which will illustrate my point .
Take for example a candidate like lipase - the enzyme that hydrolyses lipids into the consequent fatty acids and glycerol .
Obviously the enzyme is not available in the quantities that many of the other enzymes , like amylases and proteases , are available .
But there is a potential that it can be produced provided the applications emerge so that the scale of operations which is required for bulk operation can be easily maintained and so the reversible interaction between availability and application is a very intrinsic feature and probably will illustrate the story of many of the enzymes which have become commercially viable today .
As far as availability is concerned there are two major factors .
One is that we have to synthesize them .
Theoretically one can produce enzymes from any living source microbial , plant or animals but the trend in the reason past has been that the microorganism has been the preferred choice for variety of reasons .
Some of you may be familiar with them and most important one is diversity .
Secondly you can choose micro organism which will be able to act on a particular substrate , synthesize required enzyme .
On the other hand you also have a very clear understanding of the genetic machinery of the cell , the microbial cell that controls the enzyme synthesis , which you will manipulate leading to hyper production of the enzyme .
Their bulk productions , their bulk growth is very simple .
The parameters , the equipment are all standardized thanks to many other products which are produced microbially that gives an edge for microbial biosynthesis of enzymes .
The other important part is isolation , purification and stability .
In isolation and purification one of the very characteristic features is that most of the enzymes are purified by a series of steps .
An electrophoretically homogeneous protein means it is a perfectly pure enzyme .
For most of the industrial applications except for some of the medical or diagnostic applications you will not require a highly purified enzyme .
For bulk industrial processing we have to stop at purity level somewhere in between .
Compared to this crude enzyme where this specific activity is very low to a level where the contaminating enzyme that can disturb the process are revoked .
But note that all the contaminants are revoked which may not be required because any order of purification will mean additional cost , enhancement in the value of the product .
As far as the applications are concerned a lot of engineering inputs are required particularly for the extended use of the catalyst and we don ’ t want to use it just once .
As a matter of fact I think one can take a clue again here from a living cell .
The cell maintains a very perfect economy in terms of its energy as well as materials to synthesize proteins .
It doesn ’ t use the proteins only once .
It uses in a cycle and over a period of time .
There is always a maintenance part where it has to maintain the protein synthesis but it is being used repeatedly and in many of the organs of the cell , the enzymes are supported on certain organelles so that they behave almost in a fashion of insolublised enzymes .
On the basis of the same concept one can immobilize the enzymes on a support , insoluble support what we call as immobilize enzyme and use them for processes that can be used in continuous mode like any other chemical process , the term very commonly used in the chemical industry is heterogeneous catalysis .
Then a very important aspect is bulk environment design .
So far we have been limited in our mind regarding the application of enzymes that they can work only in aqueous environment .
This today is probably not a very perfect statement because a number of enzymes have been shown to function even in a non aqueous environment or in other words more accurately micro aqueous environment where you require a very small concentration of water , rest of the bulk environment will be replaced by an organic solvent and that can give us a whole new range of chemical reactions which can be carried out using the enzymes and biocatalyst particularly a transition from hydrolysis to synthesis and many of these reactions have become commercially viable today .
Ultimately for any process application of the enzymes you need to engineer the systems even after you have done immobilization , even after you have studied the optimum reaction parameter , the whole systems has to be engineered .
I mean to say that you have to develop particular hardware reactor , an enzyme reactor in which the whole reactions can be carried out with maximum productivity because ultimately the whole concept or the whole interest between will be on the productivity and which can be tailored by doing the proper process engineering .
Then you may need to monitor certain parameters , the instrumentation control , down stream processing of the product , all has to be integrated so as to have a complete application route .
In summary the broad objective of this course as I mentioned so far will be to study various scientific , technological and engineering aspects associated with the application of enzymes as a bio catalyst in process industry .
This in brief terms can be the broad definition of or broad objective of this course .
I like you to be very critical about the scientific , technological and engineering aspects .
Almost an analogy with the biotechnology in general even the enzyme technology also has a very multidisciplinary nature .
It is not that one discipline for example understanding only biochemistry can lead to understanding of the applications of enzymes in the process industries .
A whole range of basic and engineering sciences are required to be understood .
For example if you start let us say a basic science like chemistry .
Many aspects of chemistry have to be understood in relation to enzymes or in other words you can add the term biochemistry .
The functional aspect of the enzymes like the kind of chemical reactions they catalyze , the thermodynamic limits , the equilibrium convergence , the free energy change , whether the reaction is feasible , the coupling of reactions so that they become feasible in terms of free energy change and all those aspects of the enzymes protein will come under realm of bio chemistry .
A very important role is played by physics .
Today a large variety of developments that have taken place in the area of biotechnology in general and enzymes in particular can be attributed to the use of a number of physical techniques which have made us to understand a variety of systems and develop and improve upon them for various applications and physics becomes a very important component to understand the enzyme role .
You are familiar that the result of these applications and developments is the science of biophysics as you know it today .
After chemistry and physics I think the major scientific component will be biology .
For any enzyme to be produced in large quantity you need to identify a biological system which can produce the enzyme .
It can be microorganism , it can be a plant or it can be animal .
The bulk of the applications or in the bulk of the cases of enzymes we will look at microbial systems .
That is the component which biology will make us understand .
We will have to understand its morphology , its physiology so as to be able to design an appropriate enzyme production system .
The role of protein biosynthesis were their organism which will regulate the synthesis of enzymes .
The regulatory mechanisms involved in the bio synthesis of those enzyme proteins will also be understood through biology .
In the recent years an added dimension is molecular biology where we tend to understand the structure function relationship of various biological molecules at a molecular level .
How nucleic acids take part in information transformation from one cell to next generation , what are the mechanism of cell - cell signaling , communication between different cells or how does the protein molecules behave as a defense molecules ?
All variety of those functions at a molecular level has become an added dimension which has been at the center of the bio technology in general .
Similar applications will come here for biology also .
A very important scientific development has been in the computational science .
Most of the industrial applications will require the application of computational science in those systems .
Today even design of an enzyme protein , modifications for tailoring it to give some desirable property is a job which can be taken up only with the help of computational science .
Experimental sciences will take years together to come out with those conclusions which can be brought in by many of the computational programs .
You will need lot of data available to you before you can apply them but once the data are available one can easily compute and predict many of the behavior which otherwise would have taken a very long time .
For example site directed mutagenesis is what happens if an amino acid is removed and another amino acid is inserted in the polymeric chain that is in the protein chain .
Its structural behavior can be very easily understood with the computer graphics which otherwise doing experimentally probably is a Herculean task .
These are some of the basic sciences which are important .
On the other hand we have a whole range of engineering sciences which are important as far as enzyme technology is concerned .
You need to design enzyme reactors which can take care of transfer of materials ; transport of energy , transport of momentum and all transport processes can be taken care .
You need instrumentation for monitoring and control of the reactor , you need the concept of electronics particularly in some applications like biosensors , enzyme will require transducers and the ultimate is biochips .
We are far from the reality but still as the concept it has probably attracted the attention of many scientists .
That means can be used in the protein molecule or enzyme molecules as biochips in the computers .
The whole computation becomes based on biological molecules .
So a large number of engineering operations including mass transfer , heat transfer , material balance , energy balance , product separation , kinetics , thermodynamics is also involved in understanding of enzyme science and therefore one of the characteristic feature is that the whole enzyme science interfaces with a large number of basic engineering sciences and it is this interface which makes it so attractive to study , exciting to study and important to study .
Today it has become impossible probably for a bio technologist to leave aside an enzyme molecule , understanding of enzyme molecule in detail before he can call himself to be a professional in the area .
Another important aspect which I think I will like to touch upon in today ’ s lecture will be on enzyme classification .
Now you will be surprised to know that so far globally about three thousand enzymes have been isolated , characterized and reported in literature .
It ’ s not a very large number compared to the feasibility of combinations that are feasible .
If we look at enzymes as a polymer consisting of nineteen different amino acids with an average length , let us say 150 or 200 amino acids linked together .
With nineteen different amino acids probably the possibility of , variety of , diversity of proteins that are feasible is enormous almost approaching infinity .
We have been able to isolate and characterize only about three thousand .
Now this three thousand , just to understand and bring it into a systematic feature , have been classified into six different classes .
In fact this job was done way back in early seventies by international union of pure and applied chemistry , what you know as IUPAC .
They gave a classification system which is acceptable globally today and it classifies all the enzymes into six major classes ’ : oxidoreductases , transferases , hydrolases , lyases , isomerases and ligases .
The whole range of chemical reactions or bio chemical reactions that take place in a living cell are mediated by these different classes .
We must know that some of the reactions are not independent .
They are coupled there by producing effect which could be a polymerization reaction .
Directly a polymerization doesn ’ t take place as it is .
It is mediated by series of transferases and then ultimately the transferases and ligases .
Ultimately you end up with the polymer of different monomers .
But basic enzymes can be classified and each of this class is also characterized in sub classes .
Sub classes refer to the type of substrate or the type of the product that is produced by those enzymes .
So basically the whole range of each of the class here oxidoreductases a bulk of the oxidases , reductases and the hydrolases fall under this category .
Transferases involve group transfer reactions where one of the functional group with a substrate molecule is phosphorylated .
Usually they are bisubstrate reactions involving two substrates .
In hydrolases by and large the most commonly employed industrial catalyst is used mainly because of simplicity .
Because the co - substrate is water which is present in large quantity and one can use them for hydrolytic reactions .
By changing the bulk environment hydrolysis can be tailored to be used for synthetic reactions as well .
In lyases an additive enzyme which catalyses the elimination reactions that result in the double bond formation is used .
Isomerases are another important catalyst of industrial enzymes which isomerises one molecule into other isomerable molecule .
One of the most significant enzymes under this class is isomerization of glucose to fructose .
Ligases join two molecules at the expense of energy source .
In most biochemical reactions ATP is the energy currency which is consumed and regenerated through catabolic processes and such reactions are classified under ligases .
This is the classification based on the IUPAC nomenclature more from the scientific point of view .
But from the industrial point of view or from the application point of view another important type of classification which is made is in terms of three classes what we know as bulk , diagnostic and therapeutic .
This classification is based on the cost of the enzymes .
In fact the cost of the enzyme is directly linked with the concentrations in the starting material .
It could be a fermentation broth in most cases .
In the fermentation broth if the concentration of the product or the desired enzymes is very low the cost is very high and second factor of cost is the application and the degree of purity you need for that particular application .
The bulk enzymes as you can see here they fall in this category .
The concentration in the starting material is of the order of about one kg per meter cube which is significant enough to recover and you don ’ t require for the most cases a very high degree of purity and therefore their cost is also reasonably low say for example about thousand US dollars per kg .
The next category is diagnostic .
It includes also analytical enzymes .
This is the concentration in grams per meter cube level which is much lower .
Degree of purification required is also larger because you will not like any protein contaminant present in the sample and their cost is therefore significantly high of the order of about 106 US dollars per kg .
You should not get threatened by the amount of cost of 106dollars .
The quantity required is also in micrograms .
They are not in kilograms like other molecules .
So they are affordable .
The third and probably most expensive classes are therapeutic enzymes which are exclusively required for medical applications almost like life saving drugs .
Their cost is immaterial and you don ’ t make choice on the basis of cost .
In the case of industrial operations , you always make a choice between two alternatives on the basis of the cost and effectiveness .
But if effectiveness is the same the cost is the principle determining factor .
In the case of therapeutic products , the choice is not on the basis of cost but on the basis of its need if it is a life saving drug .
Many of the therapeutic enzymes particularly the recombinant proteins that are available from the enzymes like streptokinase and urokinase are blood clot dissolving enzymes .
Within fraction of a minute they simplify the situation of a cardiac failure problem due to blood clot .
Similarly a number of other such therapeutic proteins or enzymes are available like asparaginase , for patients suffering from leukemia , which is again life saving .
The cost is also of a very high order but the quantity required is of less than micro gram quantities but in a very highly purified state .
The last phase of today ’ s lecture will cover on course outline and references and the course will broadly cover these aspects .
I have given you some idea about the introductory remarks on the enzyme as process biocatalyst .
We will go into little more details on the chemical nature of enzymes that means enzymes or proteins .
We will go into functional nature of enzymes , enzymes as the catalyst and what makes them such an efficient catalyst ?
The factors which are responsible for their deactivation , the approaches that are available for stabilizing the enzymes , the role of active sites or ligand binding sites on the enzymes will be dealt in functional nature .
Then we will go on to the kinetics of enzyme catalyzed reactions because reaction kinetics will play a very important role in the choice of enzyme reactors , to understand reaction rates and the role of associated physico - chemical interactions that will take place once you immobilize the enzyme or use them in bulk environment other than water .
One of the most significant tools which have made many of the enzyme reactions commercially viable is immobilization of enzymes .
A large number of techniques are used and we will discuss them in detail .
The use of enzyme reactors , the types of reactors that are possible to be used with the mobilize enzyme , with soluble enzyme , their characteristic features , comparison between their performances , how to choose the enzyme reactors , then mass transfer and immobilize enzyme reactors .
Immobilization of enzyme will have some additional physico chemical features like diffusion and partitioning .
When they are placed in a reactor how do they influence the performance of the system ?
Immobilize cells very often in the enzymes are intercellular .
It has been felt that for many applications their isolation and purification is not required .
You can immobilize the whole cell as long as you do not inactivate other contaminating enzymes in the cell which will interfere in the process .
In the bio process design , some of the basic design principles for the enzyme catalyzed processes .
A few case studies I like to illustrate some of the earlier issues with respective to specific cases and ultimately I think I like to take up enzyme based sensors .
The enzyme sensors have become an important activity where immobilization enzymes are used .
Both immobilized enzymes and immobilized cells are used .
They have become very important tool both in diagnostics as well as monitoring of information from reactions .
This will be our course outline .
Welcome to this seventh lecture of this course on polymer chemistry .
Today , we will continue the discussion we had on step growth polymerization .
Before we start the topics of the 7 th lecture , let us recap what we have studied in the last lecture .
In the last lecture we had studied the mechanism , the strategies by which we can control the molecular weight of a step polymer .
They are sometime , as I mentioned in last lecture , that you might require to control , restrict the molecular weight of the polymer you are making .
And we discussed the two methods , one being that you use a slightly stoichiometry , one of the monomer in little excess .
And the second was that you can add a mono - functional monomer in slight amount by , then by doing this you can control the molecular weight .
You also studied the molecular weight distribution and we found that , we found that in , in case of number fraction of the different molecular weight chains , the lower molecular weight chains , the the chains , which are having lower molecular weights , they represent in maximum number .
Now , if you talk about weight fraction , then the weight fraction of different chain length molecular weight was maximum for a given molecular weight .
We did a calculation to find out , that M W and corresponding PDI , poly dispersity index , which is M w by M n and which we found , that it is PDI equals to 1 plus p .
That means , for most of the polymerization , step polymerization , when you are making high enough molecular weight as we know by this time , that p should be very close to 1 , that means , for any given high molecular weight step polymer the polydispersity is expected to be very close to 2 .
But I said , that in practice , in industry , when one makes a step polymer , seldom the distribution , the PDI value comes to around 2 , always it is found to be slightly above 2 , say between 2 to 2.5 and so on .
I said the reason as well , that because there are possibilities of size reaction and one such size reaction being cyclization , there is invariably formation of some small molecular weight cyclic molecules and as a result , when you have the small molecular weight cyclic formation , both the M w and M n comes down .
But as we know , that small molecular weight effects M n more , that means , the percentage of drop in M n is more than percentage domain M n and M w .
As a result , M w by M n goes up .
So , the PDI goes beyond 2 .
We also discussed at the end different ways of a molecule , whether it is a monomer or a oligomer , can undergo cyclization and we will continue that discussion today .
And I talked about two options in a monomer , they can intramolecularly cyclize or in oligomer , they can , if their reactive functional group , they can cyclize as well .
Now , there is a third , third option where a growing chain can polycyclize , let us look at that option as well .
Say , you have an oligomer or a polymer chain of hydroxy - carboxylic acid , which is polyester .
Now , this can undergo intermolecular nucleophilic substitution reaction , which we called back biting , is basically the one end of the polymer chain is biting back in the main chain of the polymer forming a cyclic molecule and another molecule .
So , this is another way we can cyclic and form and this is the process is called backbiting , from the end of the polymer chain to the back bone of the existing polymer chain .
So , that is backbiting by substitution nucleophilic reaction .
Now , as I said that the extent of cyclization in comparison to linear polymerization depends upon both , thermodynamic factor and as well as kinetic factor .
So , it depends upon both .
Now , we started discussing about the thermodynamic factor .
Thermodynamic factor is nothing but the stability of the forming cyclic rings .
For example , we know from our organic chemistry knowledge , that general order , general order of stability of different , of different ring structure follows in the following order , that a ring containing three or four atom in a ring is least stable or lowest , lowest compared to a 5 - membered or 7 to 13 - membered ring , which is even lower stable than 6 - membered or a 14 - membered ring and higher and that we know from our organic chemistry knowledge .
That is because we have , in a small ring we have more ring strain and torsional in a big chain you have a torsional strain as well .
So , obviously , formation of 6 - membered or 4 - membered or higher membered ring will be always preferred thermodynamically compared to a ring size having 3 - membered or 4 - membered in it .
So , which means , that in thermodynamics , factors will favor formation of a 6 - membered or 4 - membered or higher membered ring in case of cyclic formation .
Now , does it mean , that always you have formation of cyclic , for example , 14 and higher members ?
Now , as you can imagine , that if you have a polymer chain or oligomer chain having 14 or higher carbon atom or other atoms in , in the , in the backbone , now this is , this trend is valid for , not only for rings having only carbon atom in the ring , but it also valid for the rings where you have heteroatom , like say for example , ethers or esters or amides as well .
This is true for almost every possible ring .
Now , I was talking about , that if you have a larger ring , larger linear molecules , say having 14 or higher number of atoms in the , in the ring , in the linear molecules , then they have so many conformation , this , as the more or the higher is the number of atoms or longer is the chain , you have more number of conformation of that molecule possible .
And so the probability , that any conformation will have this two reactive function groups coming close to each other , so that they can react and form ring is always very low .
So , if you , you can imagine as well , that as you grow longer and longer the number of conformations , which will enable the two functional groups at the present at the end to come closer and react and form ring will be lower and lower .
So , in terms of kinetic factor the higher the chain length , the lower is the possibility of formation of ring .
Now , if you talk about the rate of polymerization , which will help us in designing reaction conditions , which will minimize the cyclic formation , let us look at the rate of ring formation or cyclization and , and the linear polymerization .
Now , as we can imagine or understand by now , that ring formation is a mono , unimolecular process , whether linear polymerization is a bimolecular process ?
So , I can write the rate of cyclization versus rate of linear polymerization is k c rate constant for cyclization and because it is a unimolecular intramolecular reaction , so we have this .
And rate of k , polymer , polymerization and because it is a bimolecular reaction , so we have M square , which gives us k c by k p 1 by M .
Now , as long , as long as M is less than 1 , molar cyclization will be preferred .
If M is higher than 1 molar , then linear polymerization will be preferred that you can see from this expression .
Let us , only from the concentration of the monomer you can find out , that if it is below 1 , then rate of this , rate of cyclization will be higher and if it is above 1 , this will be a fraction .
So , the linear formation will be rate of polymerization will be higher .
So , it is always advisable , it is always advisable , that to minimize the cyclization , we always use the maximum possible concentration of the monomers and the base can , we can do if you do a bulk polymerization , that means , which we are doing the reaction with the monomers and , and the catalyst , if required .
So , so that is the maximum possible concentration you can have in , in to minimize the cyclization .
Now , what happen to k c and k p ?
As , as a reaction progresses or the conversion goes up , now as we know , that k p is independent of , independent of conversion or the reaction , time of reaction and which comes from the fact of the assumption of equal reactivity of the functional group and we have seen in earlier lectures , that experimentally , that is also true , that rate is independent , rate independent on the conversion .
So , k p is constant throughout this process .
So , now what happens , what happen to k c , rate constant for cyclization ?
Now , as we have seen just now from the last page , that if you grow the chain , as the reaction progresses , that more and more conversion happens , the chain grows .
Now , as the chain grows , the possibility , the kinetic feasibility of the two functional groups present at the end coming and reacting to form ring , ring , comes down , which means , that k c comes down as a reaction progresses because the kinetic feasibility , that the longer the chain , that chances , that two end will come and react each other forming intra - molecular reaction , forming a ring , is always lower .
So , as the reaction progresses , as p progresses , k c comes down .
Now , you can also argue , that as the reaction progresses , the monomer , the monomer concentration , in this case monomer means the species , which is forming the cyclic , that also comes down because you know , the time goes , the monomer molecule react .
So , the concentration of the species , which is forming intra - molecular reaction , which is carrying out , which is undergoing intra - molecular reactions to form cyclic also come down .
So , then the rate of cyclization also should increase in that process .
So , if the k c come down with concentration , with conversion , the cyclization should come down , whereas this is acting in opposite direction .
As the concentration of monomers comes down , the rate of cyclization will go up .
Now , it , it has been generally found fortunately , that this effect is less compared to this , which means , for general step polymers when you go for higher and higher conversion , the rate of cyclization comes down because the k c , the value of k c comes down because of kinetic feasibility .
So , that is , that is good .
So , as we , in most cases the cyclization tendency comes down as we make higher and higher molecular weight .
Now , what is the , what is the problem if I have some , few cyclic molecules in , in the polymer at the end of the polymerization ?
First of all , we have seen , that presence of this small molecular cyclics will increase the polydispersity index , which means , the distribution of the polymers chains and which effect property in , in several cases , not coming to specific examples , but it , it , it does effect the polymer property in , in several cases .
And also , if this cyclics are present in the polymer mixture , they are sometimes very detrimental in the polymer property .
Because during the polymer processing , when you take this polymer and process mix with something compound and then take that compound at granules to make some final product by say , molding process , being low molecular weight this cyclic molecules tend to come up to the surface .
They , they preferred , they are , they prefer to be in surface .
So , during the molding process , they actually migrate to the surface and they prefer to be in the surface , which actually is very detrimental from the products properly point of view .
So , in most cases it is preferred , it is done , that at the end of the reaction some additional steps are done to strip off the cyclic molecules , small cyclic molecules from the final product , so that when you take that polymer , which is in the , at the end of the reaction , which you are taking forward for molding process , which will be , have least amount of cyclic , cyclic molecule present .
So , now we , this reaction step , reaction can process , you know , undergo in thermodynamic control way or a kinetic control way .
What is thermodynamic control ?
Now , in this case , the linear and cyclic molecules , they are , during the entire reaction they are in equilibrium , whereas in kinetic control process they are not in equilibrium .
The reaction proceeds without establishing a equilibrium between the cyclic and linear species here .
Whereas , in terminal control polymerization , there is equilibrium , between cyclic molecules and linear molecules there is a equilibrium .
So , entire , during the entire process , polymerization process , this equilibrium exist .
Now , this one example we can give , the normal , excuse me , normal hydroxyl acid , you know , normal ester formation , polyester formation from diacid plus diol to give polyester plus H 2 O .
Now , as you can see , the H 2 O can take part as long as H 2 O present in medium , they can take part and hydrolyze the cyclic molecules and so that they can , cyclic molecules open up and undergo further linear polymerization or take part in further linear polymerization , and new cyclic small molecular formation take place and so on .
So , in this case the reaction proceeds maintaining equilibrium between cyclic and linear polymerization .
In case of kinetic control , as I said , that it does not maintain the equilibrium .
For example , if you have a diacyl chloride plus diol , which forms polyester plus HCl .
Now , HCl does not take part in reaction with the polyester , whether it is cyclic or linear polyester , which means , that in this case there is no equilibrium present between the cyclic and the linear polymer molecule .
So , what is the effect of formation of cyclics in the molecular weight or the degree of polymerization of the final polymers , which can be arrived from Carother ’ s equation and without going into derivation we can write , that X n is 1 by 1 minus P , where x is a constant , depends on concentration of the reactants and a is rate of linear polymerization by rate of cyclization .
Now , this two term , this , this expression is not very useful because the values for x and a are not available for most cases .
So , so this is , this is good to know the expression , but this is not very useful because we are , we do not know the values of x and a all the time and as a goes lower , that if more cyclization happen , X n comes down compared to if there were no cyclization , which in this case X n was 1 by 1 minus P .
In case of absence of any cyclization , just pure linear , linear chain formation we have seen the Carother ’ s , Carother ’ s equation from earlier lectures , that X n is 1 , 1 over 1 minus P .
So , because of cyclization x n comes down .
So , more and more cyclization happen , the degrees of polymerization also come down .
As we realized in the beginning of this lecture as well , that as the more cyclic molecules , small molecules form , it affects both , the degrees of polymerization number , average degrees of polymerization and the weight average degrees of polymerization , but it affects more the number average degrees polymers compared to weight average degrees of polymerization .
So , you get the PDI higher than 2 .
Now , at a is very high , is very high , if , if a is very high , that means , almost absence of cyclization , then X n would be 1 minus 1 minus p , which is basically giving us back the the original Carothers equation for linear polymerization , linear step polymerization .
Now , one thing also we should remember in case of step polymerization , that the chains , when the chains are forming during the reactions , the chains can , there is a possibility , that chains can also undergo exchange reaction between them and making the chains reacting with each other .
For example , if I take a… This again coming back to the example of polyester .
Now , this molecule can again and do a nucleophilic substitution reaction and they can exchange the parts in two different chains , but in this case there is no change in number of functional group , functional groups .
So , so no change in number of molecules , either as a result no change in X n bar , no change in molecular weight as well .
So , this statistically does not have any significance in terms of final polymer product , in terms of their molecular weight or molecular distribution .
But this is , you should have , you know , you should have knowledge , that during the chain , during the polymerization the chains can undergo exchange reaction between them and they can be subtle , like if you have two different , if you are starting with , say for example , if you are not starting with two monomers A and type , your type , you are starting with different oligomers and carrying out the reaction from there .
If you are starting with two different oligomers and you are starting the reaction from there , at the end of the polymerization you will find that this chains are reshuffled and they have a uniform composition across .
But when you are starting with the monomers , it does not matter , you will finally going to get the same polymers , whether there is or there is not any reshuffling exchange reaction between the two growing chain .
This is just for your knowledge .
Now , let us go to next topic which is branching and cross - linking .
Let us say , I have a molecule A and B functional group and I have a molecule like this , which have three A functional group and how they will react .
Obviously , A can only react with B .
So , it will react with B , other side will be A , again this will react with B , so other side will be A .
similarly , this side , it will react with B , other side will be A .
And similarly so here also it will react with B A B A , something like that .
Now , you can see this , in this case you always have A group at the end .
Now , this is the branch , this is the main linear , linear chain and this is the branch and number of branch , obviously , will be depend upon the , the moles of this , this group .
Now , we are writing this is A f , where f is 3 here .
So , f is the number of functional group present in this molecule .
So , f is 3 here .
So , you can understand that in this case , always the ends will have a functional group of A , which cannot react with each other .
You know , growing chain , cannot react with this only react with the monomer .
So , if I , will this branch react with any other chain growing chain ?
No , if I have to , if this branch has to react with any other chain , any other polymer chain , then it has to find B group , which it can react , but there is not any polymer chain having free B group at the end , which means , that it cannot undergo reaction with another chain , which means , in this case there would not be any cross - linking between two polymer chain .
Cross - linking is when you have a branch or you have a connection between two chains .
If I had a chain here , then this is the cross - linking , it would have been cross - linking .
So , let us take another example .
How it will react ?
This one , A A plus B B B f and where f is 3 or higher .
Obviously , this reaction will be A A B B B A .
Suppose , this B comes here and you have B B .
Suppose we are talking about f is 3 , this will react with A A .
Again , B B , this will react with A A and B B and so on .
Now , in this case you have A B or if you have here A that means , in the polymers you can have the two functional groups at the end .
So , if I have some polymer chain , which branch having A A at the end , now what will happen ?
This two can react and form a connection between two linear chains .
Now , this is what cross linking is all about .
In earlier case , there was no cross - linking possible between two linear chains , but in this case , because they are functional group , free functional group present , both types , it can undergo a cross - linking reaction .
What are the other types it can undergo ?
If I have , say like , A A plus B f type , it can undergo cross - linking , you can visualize , yourself plus A f plus few B B molecule , then also it can cross link , from cross link , or you can have , if you have A f plus B f molecule , this , all this can form cross - links , cross linking .
So , you understand , if I have a poly - functional group , which have functionality more than 2 , 3 or more , then there is a depending upon which reaction system , which are , we are talking about , if there is possibility that it form , it may form cross link .
Now , what is a molecular weight distribution ?
In this case , I go back this and write the molecular weight distribution again without going into the derivation where X w y X n is given by 1 plus f r p .
You know all the term here , f r p plus 1 minus r p square and at r is equal to 1 , p is 1 .
This X w X n , which is the polydispersity index will land up 1 plus 1 f .
So , that is your molecular weight distribution .
If f is 1 , molecular weight distribution would be , say , if I take this molecule , just one , one of functional group and obviously , it will be , we discussed that earlier , it will be like a linear polymerization with presence of small amount of monofunctional group .
If A , A f is 2 , physical A and A , it will be , it will be much narrow distribution .
If f is 1 , then it will be , if the distribution is like this , if the distribution is like this , for f is 1 , if I increase f , it will be narrower .
If f is 3 , it will become even narrower .
So , this f is 1 , f is 2 , f is 3 .
So , when you have more and more branching in this case , the chains are the dispersion the , the polymer chains are having lower and lower poly dispersity .
So , basically in this case , low molecular weight chain are not present in that amount and that number if there was no this multifunctional poly - functional group .
Now , what will be the poly number of , average number of molecular weight in the second case , this one ?
Let us go and try to derive that .
Now , for simplicity , let us start with , I have a system where A is to be , to functional group , that is the simplest thing we have been discussing , they are in equal number , so 1 is to 1 .
So , and also we define a term f average , which is the average number of functional groups present per molecule , per molecule , which will be given by N i f i total n i , if n i is the , n i is number of molecules having f i functional , fi functional groups .
So , that is , that we are defining this term and we are assuming for simplicity , that , this is the condition we are having .
Now , let us consider that N 0 is the number of molecules at t is equal to 0 .
At the beginning , N 0 is number of molecules .
So , what is the number of functional group ?
N 0 multiplied by f average because f average is number of functional groups present per molecule on average .
So , that is the number of functional group present at t is equal to 0 .
Also , let N is the number of molecule present , molecules present , at the end of the reaction what will be X n ?
As you know earlier , that is N 0 by N .
Now , we know that N is the number of molecules present .
Now , after end of reaction and N 0 was the number of molecules present at the beginning , so how many number of molecules reacted ?
How many molecules reacted ?
N 0 was number of molecules in the beginning and N is the number of molecules now .
So , number of molecules reacted , so number of molecules reacted is N 0 minus N .
So , number of functional group reacted , now when one molecule disappears how many number of function group is reacting ?
Two functional groups , so number of functional group reacted , groups reacted is twice N 0 by N .
So , what is a conversion ?
So , conversion is number of molecules reacted , number of function group reacted and the number of functional group originally present , so that is a fraction , that is a conversion , which gives you 2 by f average minus twice N by N 0 f average or twice f average minus twice X n f average because N 0 by N is your X n .
As we talked about , we can rearrange this also to get X n is 2 by 2 minus f average into P .
So , in this case , this is X n , this is your P , this is conversion .
From this expression we can know , that if f average is higher , more than 2 , then for given P value , given conversion we will get a higher molecular weight , higher degrees of polymerization in comparison to linear polymer .
For linear polymer what was there for linear X n was , 1 by 1 minus P .
If you will recollect , see , for a given P , f average is more than 2 , then this number will be higher compared to the X n obtained in linear polymer .
So , we will , even without pushing the reaction to very high conversion we can make high molecular weight in this case .
If you talk about P , what happens , that what happen when X n is infinity , when X n can become infinity ?
If the reaction , if the molecules in all the chains , now tied up in all the chains , if i have say something like this , polymer chains are growing .
Now , I have cross link here , here and there somewhere , somewhere like this , something like this , what is a molecular weight of this polymer ?
These are all , all chains are connected , there is no individual molecular weight if the , all at the point when are complete network formation , that is , when the molecular weight becoming 20 , and that is a point you can visibly see the gel formation .
Gel formation means , which is not soluble in the medium , which is insoluble in any solvent , all in bulk as well .
So , that when the molecular weight becomes infinity , X n becomes infinity , that means , basically , you have the entire molecular polymers unfrosting to each other .
Then the first sign of gel formation happen and we call that as a gel polymer .
So , when molecular weight becomes infinity for the first time at what conversion , that conversion is turned as the gel point .
So , what is a gel point ?
When X n is infinity , so P c , P critical , which , that , which conversion the , the conversion at which there is a first time of gel formation or the network formation , we call that as gel point and which gives you by , 2 by f average .
If there is only AA plus BB tied molecule and obviously , f average 2 , when that can only happen when P is 1 .
We know , that for linear polymerization the infinite molecular happen only when everything is reactive , the , all the monomers are reactive forming a single chain .
It is basically give you an infinitly molecular… So , that happens when P is 1 , but if f average is more than 2 , then at a lower value you can make a gel point and a gel .
Now , from a practical point of you , maybe , I will come in the next lecture , that what is the utility of these branches , branch formation or a cross link formation .
Now , what is , what is the problem in if we have cross link formation or if there could be , in some cases there could be some advantage , some property advantage if we have lightly cross link network present in your polymer system , that I will discuss in the next lecture and with giving you some examples of where this deliberately , this uncross - linking is done to utilize that polymer for a special property .
Now , we almost completed our discussion on the mechanism aspect of the theoretical basis of step polymerization .
Now , onwards what we , I am going to discuss is , what is the procession , what are the process condition to make the high molecular rate successful step polymerization .
And in next lecture what I am planning is to give the process of synthesizing different step polymers , like polyesters , polycarbonate , and it give you the chemistry of what is the reaction is carried out in real sense , in practical sense , to make this step polymer .
So , next lecture I will complete that discussion on step polymerization .
Now , let us begin with , let us see what is a process ?
What are the process conditions required for a successful step polymerization ?
We have seen , that during are discussions we have covered everything now .
We have mentioned everything , now I am just summarizing one after one point , so that I will give you complete picture , what are the parameters , what are the conditions you must have in place , so that we make a successful higher molecular weight step polymer .
Let us go and see point by point and the slide first , that reaction rates , you know , reaction rates are generally slow for this poly , step polymers in typically rate constant are of the order of 10 to the power 3 liter mole inverse second inverse , which is very low .
So , it cannot be done at room temperature .
So , high temperature is required at typically 150 degree to say , 250 degree centigrade is the temperature , is typically applied or this temperature where the polymerization is carried out .
So , high temperature is required to , to facilitate , to make the reaction faster .
And you also know from our kinetics , we the kinetics .
Remember , that the molecular weight was proportional to , related to the initial monomer concentration N 0 .
We can recollect there , which means , that this always preferred to a step polymerization with high monomer concentration , which means , that if you are doing it in a solution , then you do it in a higher concentration and if it is possible to do in a bulk where we have only the monomers and the catalyst , that is the preferred situation .
Next , we know , that to make a high molecular weight , P should be close to 1 , the conversion , the conversion and from kinetics discussion we have seen , that to have P close to 1 , very high number , we have to continue the reaction for a longer time .
There is no other , there is no , no other alternate rules by which we can achieve P very high , close to 1 without , you know , keeping the reaction for a longer time ; there is no other rules .
We have to keep the reaction , or continue the reaction for a longer time to have the P value close to 1 , which means , that if you have some monomer or the resulting polymer or oligomer are not thermally stable .
Then , it is a problem , that those might degrade and generate some impurities in the polymer , which can generate color or which can degrade the polymer in later stage and , and it will not give you , not give you the properties , which you are looking for from that polymers .
So , it is , it is always preferred , that thermally stable polymers , the thermally stable polymers should be utilized in the polymerization .
And if you know also , that if it is in high temperature and if there is a presence of oxygen , then thermo duration is a , is a very feasible way of degrading any organic molecules .
So , it is always preferred , that reaction if possible , should be done in an inert atmosphere , like nitrogen atmosphere , argon atmosphere , so that you are taking away the possibility or minimize , or minimizing the possibility of oxidative , thermo - oxidative degradation of the monomer or the resulting oligomer or polymer molecules .
And as is , as we discussed , that external catalyst is always preferred than an internal catalyst , that basically with internal catalyst , outside catalyst , it is very difficult , even more difficult to high molecular , so external catalyst is always preferred .
Next point is , you know , stoichiometric ratio r should be close to 1 .
We have seen that when r is not close to 1 , the molecular rate becomes slower .
Now , to have r is close to 1 , you first have to know the purity of the monomer and if there is an impurity , you do not know what you are putting in the reaction .
So , it is always advisable , it is always preferred and always industrial , it is always done to have monomer , which are extremely pure , very pure , so that you know what you are putting if you are adding two monomers .
Assuming , that they are close to 1is to one or whatever target molecular rate you are looking for , that has to be the same what you are giving .
That means , the monomers has to be very pure and you know , if required , you can change the ratio r slightly .
Put one of them in excess , so that the molecular weight is controlled if you have some molecular weight in your target and that can also be done by adding small molecules , small amount of monofunctional molecules .
You have also seen , that equilibrium are very , equilibrium is , equilibrium consideration are also very important , prime important .
We , we have seen , that in the most cases , this poly are step polymers , are equilibrium reaction .
So , to have the product formation you have to take out the small molecular rate , condense it out of the system .
You have to write that out by applying a low pressure , that will affect in vacuum and high temperature and so that your reaction proceed towards the product side , towards the polymers side .
You have also seen , that it is always preferred , that you have a higher k value , higher equilibrium constant .
Now , what happens if you have higher k ?
Then for , for given polymer , for targeting same polymer molecular weight it can actually live with the small amount of , mono , more amount of condensate in the system if you have comparing into reaction having one , having higher equilibrium constant .
Then in that case , you can live , build that high molecular weight leaving little excess amount of the condensate .
So , it is always preferred , that you take out as much as condensate as possible by your system , by your technique and also , you also design the monomers , so that reactivity is higher and so the equilibrium constant is higher .
Next point is , no or minimum side reaction .
We know , that this side reactions cyclic formation , if cyclic formation takes place too much time , they will come out of the reaction and your goes up .
If your side reaction is forming some molecules , which act as a chain stopper , which is like act as end of mono - functional group , if your side reactions are producing some molecules , which are mono - functional , which act as chains stopper , then it will harm your building up the molecular .
It will stop the molecule there itself .
And if your monomers , if your side reactions , which hinder the reactivity of a functional group , if you have some species , which is generating , which is affecting the reacting functional group , that also will hinder your , you know , reactivity of the functional group , hence the polymer formation .
So , proper choice of monomer is also very important .
And as we have seen , that to reduce the cyclic formation , cyclic molecules formation , it is preferred , that we do the reaction in high concentration of monomer .
We have seen just now , that in earlier today , that it is always preferred to have a monomer present in high concentration , so that we can reduce the cyclic formation .
We have also seen that is important , that we have the functional groups present in the .
During the reaction if some molecules oligomer are forming , which are say , precipitate out of the solution , if you are doing the reaction in a solution , if the oligomer precipitate out , then the functional groups are not available to reaction .
So , it is always your solvent or the mediums should be such that your function groups are always accessible , should be always accessible to react .
Now , the two other things are thermal management because polymerization reactions are exothermic .
So , as more and more reaction is happening , more and more get , heat get generated , but fortunately the exothermicity or the amount of heat generated for in a step growth polymerization is not high .
So , managing the heat , generate , generation or the heat generation during the polymerization is quiet not difficult .
And next point is managing the high viscosity .
As we progress , the molecular rate goes up and again , fortunately , the molecular rate goes up to high , very high level at the end of the polymerization and on the P is very high .
So , except the , when except the situation is , P is very high , the viscosity of medium remains manageable and at the high viscosity in , at the high conversion in a time frame the polymer goes up and viscosity also goes up .
So , we need to have very good mechanism , so that the , the can be exposed to the vacuum you are applying , so that you can push the reaction towards the product side .
Now , if you have this of most of covers , all the conditions , all the criteria if you have need to follow a successful completion of a step polymer .
Now , let us , you , you follow all the , let us , you follow all the , all this , everything , all this points , which we covered in , in last 5 , 10 minutes , you , you follow exactly all the things according to my direction or according to direction given in a book and end of the reaction , you find , that there is no molecular builder , it just forms oligomer .
So , you , you think , that whatever I am just talking is , is not correct or whatever is written in the book is not correct , you might think that way , but it is not you have to think little higher .
Then where this , your experience comes , your experience of polymers synthesis terms , what we will do ?
We will start from that point that even if you follow the requirement of successful step polymerization , here could be some other reasons , which you need to , you know , be careful , so that you have a successful buildup of high molecular weight in a step polymers polymerization process .
So , we will visit , we just this we will just begin with that in the next lecture and complete at the module on step growth polymerization by looking at the synthetic procedure of the several step polymers .
Today we shall discuss about some of the issues and the future directions of enzyme technology that we are likely to face in near future .
So far we have been talking about the status of enzyme technology as is being practiced in the industries as for the application of enzymes are concerned in different sectors of their application .
The issues that I will be talking today are ones which are still posing challenge and are restricted to laboratory investigations so far and it is likely that some of them in a very short time will come out as industrial processing concepts .
First issue that I want to draw your attention is the bio processing with co - factor linked enzymes .
As I mentioned earlier that a large number of enzymes that are known are mediated through co - enzymes or co - factors as you know and most of the applications that we talked earlier , they related to only hydrolytic enzymes which do not require co - factors with the sole exception of glucose isomerase which is an isomerase and it also does not require co - factor .
The large number of cofactor linked enzymes therefore opens a big challenge to the industry or to the scientist who are concerned with the diversification of application of enzymes .
The basic motivation or rational for the use of co - factor linked enzymes comes from the function of living cell in which a number of co - factor linked enzymes are operational in various metabolic path ways which are used by cells for carrying out their various catabolic as well as anabolic reactions .
The basic concept in a living cell , when it comes to cofactor linked enzymes , relates to cycling of the cofactor between two enzyme catalyzed reactions .
The two enzyme catalyzed reactions are coupled in a cell in such a way that the cofactor which is used in one direction is recycled back through another reaction with which it is linked and the total equilibrium is in favor of the desired intermediate the direct part to be synthesized by the cell .
As far as their industrial application is concerned the issue is restricted to mainly three issues : one is that the coenzyme and the enzyme must be retained in the reactor .
We have seen in our earlier deliberations where we have talked about immobilized enzymes that the enzyme can be retained in the reactor and used over a long period of time .
A similar concept has to be developed for co - enzyme retention in the reactor .
Although it is little more difficult in the sense that while enzymes provide you a large molecular size as well as a number of functional groups on the molecule which can be used for coupling to matrix where the required enzyme is a small molecular weight compound not such a large molecule and also the number of functional groups available on the molecule are very restricted .
So exactly the same concept may not be applied , but still one needs to retain the co - enzyme so that it is not consumed during the reaction .
The basic concept to retain the enzyme as listed here is the use of the water soluble polymer bound coenzyme .
For retention of the coenzyme we use instead of a small molecular weight coenzyme , a water soluble polymer bound coenzyme .
Because of binding purposes we add another functional group which can be used for coupling to a water soluble polymer which may not be present on the original coenzyme as it is and therefore you need an analogue .
When I say analogue I am referring to some chemical and structural modifications but the role of coenzyme is retained by the molecule .
The second issue is regeneration of the coenzyme .
The regeneration of the co - enzyme like in a living cell can be carried out by coupling to enzyme catalyzed reaction , as you see here .
In a membrane reactor in which a reaction has to be carried out , I illustrate a general redox reaction , AH plus B going to A plus BH .
There is an oxidation of AH and reduction of B and this can be done by two enzymes .
One of them oxidizes AH and produces A , where as the other one reduces B using the same co - factor in the reverse direction .
If this co - enzyme is NAD , this has to be coupled to a polymer so that the coenzyme is not lost during use .
Another important feature is that the product needs to be separated to drive the coupled reaction and the separation of product is mediated by use of membrane reactor in which the high molecular weight enzyme as well as the coenzyme , which is now made to be high molecular weight , is retained in the reactor and thereby the product can be separated from the reaction mixture and the reaction can be driven in the desired direction .
I will illustrate the point with one of the examples .
There is lot of chemistry involved because different people have proposed different kind of chemical reactions .
I am not interested to give you detailed chemistry .
Just to explain the concept for example you take polyacrylamide , which is a water soluble polymer .
This is derivatised by hydrogen hydrate to polyacrylamide hydrazide and this polyacrylamide hydrazide then is coupled to a co - enzyme NAD which is derivatised in the form of carboxymethyl NAD .
So therefore a carboxymethyl group is generated here and carboxymethyl NAD is then activated by carbodiimide , the reaction which you are familiar , with the carboxylic group containing enzymes by activation by carbodiimide and therefore you get an activated co - enzyme molecule .
A carboxymethyl which is NAD analogue is activated using carbodiimide under acidic conditions to give you an activated NAD .
You can call it NAD activated .
This activated NAD is coupled with the polyacrlyamide hydrazide and this on coupling gives you a water soluble large molecular weight coenzyme analogue which is functionally compatible with the dehydrogenase which you want to use and similar systems can be designed for use .
This describes a typical laboratory setup in which a stirred cell type of ultra filtration system has been used .
A is the feed reservoir ; it is passed through a valve which can direct the reaction vessel either to the reservoir or to the cylinder for pressure .
It can have both the directions and the reaction can be carried out high pressure and the reactor contains the polymer bound co - enzyme , the substrate and the two enzymes .
We are carrying out reaction in CSTR and when the reaction goes on , the product formed is sent out as the permeate in the ultra filtration cell and the enzyme and the polymer bound coenzyme is retained in the reactor and the substrate can be fed continuously by pressure gradient in the reactor vessel and the reactor can be continued over a long period of time .
Two of the reactions which have been carried in such a reactor is one is continuous oxidation of ethanol using permeabilized yeast cells .
The yeast cells when they are permeabilized , the lipid on the membrane is dissolved by a solvent and it becomes freely permeable to various substrates .
That means it has lost its permeability barriers for substrate and product exchange .
In fact it has shown to give some kind of enzymatic activity which can be called as NADH oxidase ; it oxidizes the reduced NAD into oxygen like an oxidase activity and it generates hydrogen peroxide and this hydrogen peroxide to break down requires peroxidase or else it will inactivate the original enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase .
In the same reactor system if you use ethanol , polyacrylamide hydrazide coupled NAD and peroxidase you can get a net conversion oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde and the profiles shown here give you the kind of reaction progress .
This is reaction progress in hours .
In the first profile there is no peroxidase added which means as soon as the reaction starts the hydrogen peroxide produced inactivates the alcohol dehydrogenase and no further reaction takes place .
Only when you add hydrogen peroxide , here hydrogen peroxide or peroxidase has been added , you get the reaction going on to a sizable extent until the time again because of some reasons either the enzyme has leaked out and the alcohol concentration again builds up and there is no reduction .
In third case the system was improved by treatment of the alcohol dehydrogenase containing cells by glutaraldehyde which is aimed to fix the alcohol dehydrogenase on to some cellular organelles and there by making it almost in the form of an immobilized enzyme so that it doesn ’ t leak out and you can see the clear advantage that the reaction is extended over a large period of time comparatively but again still it goes and although this system can be demonstrated for eight hours or ten hours but still there are some problems which are still so far not understood as to what happens in the case of cofactors cycling .
The concentration of NAD here is very , very small and therefore the cycling is taking place ; there is no doubt .
But because you are ultimately here reducing the concentration let us say from hundred milli molar to an extent of about seventy milli molar which means thirty milli molar concentration has been reduced which means that in a NAD concentration of let us say ten milli molar , seven hundred cycles have taken place .
But ultimately this cycling is not continuous over a long period of time and that is still inherent problem .
A similar profile is observed in the case of conversion of pyruvate to alanine using same polyacrylamide hydrazide coupled NAD and formate dehydrogenase and alanine dehydrogenase .
As I mentioned the use of format dehydrogenase has an advantages that the reaction products are carbon dioxide and water which can be easily stripped off but you have to provide formate as a substrate along with it and the circles indicate no glutaraldehyde treatment and the triangles is with glutaraldehyde which very clearly indicates that the down fall is prevented and the enzyme is available over a longer period of time and reaction continues .
But the data beyond sixteen hours have not been shown here but within a couple of hours definitely not more than twenty four hours it is able to say and the reactor performance drops down .
The second issue was to recall bio processing of unnatural substrate .
Here we had highlighted that there are a number of enzyme reactions which although give you lot of benefits , very favorable concepts , in terms of their specificity , in terms of the desired nature of the product they produce in the right stereoisomeric form but still the problem is also in relation to the never specificity gives you a much more problem .
If you look at the two reactions that I referred to earlier that is conversion of fumaric acid to malic acids and also maleic acid to aspartic acid .
Both reactions involve addition of water and ammonia respectively on to a carbon , carbon double bond and give you the corresponding products malic acid and aspartic acid .
Both the products find application in the food or related industry .
Malic acid is directly used in most of the beverages as the acidulant and aspartic acid , the bulk use is in synthesis of aspartane but the quantity required is not very large .
On the other hand look at similar reactions which are of commercial value and in large quantity .
They are just representative reactions ; there are many more reactions which come under this category .
You see lactic acid to acrylic acid .
Removal of water molecule from lactic acid is reverse of what fumarase does and this reaction is of immense value and if it can be carried out it can serve a great purpose .
Similarly extraction of water from ethanol to give ethylene or dehydration of ethanol .
Then again extraction of water from 1,3 - butanediol to produce 1,3 - butadiene which is a substrate or monomer for synthetic rubber .
All the three substrates which are listed here are bulk fermentation products .
If they can transform enzymatically using an enzyme something similar to that of fumerase or a modified fumerase probably one can have very significant impact on the enzyme technology .
Such efforts are drawing attention of people so that we can design enzymes reactions to meet the requirements .
In general although the enzymes catalyse very desirable chemical transformations like fumaric acid to malic acid or maleic acid to aspartic acid but often they convert only substrate that have limited commercial interest .
In fact if these enzymes can be used for those conversions which have very varied and very large commercial interest the impact will be much greater and one can be really fascinated with the industrial application of enzymes .
Other feature was people tend to accept the enzyme names very literally and in absolute sense .
When we name glucose oxidase we interpret that glucose is a substrate with oxygen as the ultimate lactone acceptor for oxidation of glucose .
Similarly galactose oxidase also is in the same concept but in practice these enzymes are not so highly specific .
In the first slide we saw that some of the enzymes which are of industrial value are very specific .
They have very narrow specificity and we need to broaden their specificity .
On the other hand we have certain enzymes which are broadly specific which are not very narrowly specific but we are not able to use them for variety of reactions .
So both the things have to be really tackled so as to be able to apply enzymes on a large perspective like for example glucose oxidase can use large number of electron acceptor other than oxygen which can be then reduced at the expense of glucose .
Glucose will get oxidized and the corresponding electron acceptor will get reduced and one can carry out a number of organic chemical transformations .
Galactose oxidase is another enzyme which is known to catalyse the classical reaction of galactose to the corresponding aldehyde by oxygen .
But this galactose oxidase is a very broad …… applicable enzyme and it really acts on a variety of aliphatic and aromatic alcohols to give rise to corresponding aldehydes and these aldehydes , the conversion of alcohol to aldehydes oxidation reactions , are of great significance in perfumery and cosmetic industry and a number of reactions can be catalyzed .
One thing you must be sure is that the rates on different substrates might be different .
Today with an understanding of the site directed mutagenesis , it is possible to change the substrate specificity and also improve the catalytic functional rates .
So the message is that in addition to the natural reactions catalyzed by enzymes there is always a range of non - natural reactions that are of commercial interest .
The challenge is to unfold and link these non - natural reactions for the enzyme available in bulk quantities .
Another feature is first we must pay attention to those enzymes which are already available in bulk quantities .
Because one would like to look at a particular bio transformation but if the enzyme is not available in bulk quantity at a low cost the application may be inhibitory ; may not be feasible .
So best is to initially look at those enzymes which are available in large quantities and one can only diversify their application to a large range of non - natural reactions which are of commercial value and this will require very clear understanding of their reaction mechanism because presently those reactions are being carried out by chemical transformations and making use of the reaction mechanism one can probably think of certain unconventional reactions .
The third interesting area which I wanted to talk was bio - organic synthesis using enzymes in micro - aqueous medium .
Normally we understand that enzymes are operable in aqueous medium and the basic reason is that a large number of non - covalent interactions that we are familiar with enzyme structure are through interaction of the enzyme protein with the water molecule and water is a requisite specie in the case of maintenance of a confirmation of an enzyme molecule and to carry out the chemical or bio chemical reactions .
Such a perception in the earlier days was based on a very limited understanding of the enzyme structure and function and the limited understanding was that people had looked at the stability of the enzyme in water miscible solvents say for example acetone which is still used for precipitation of enzyme proteins ; it makes aggregates and precipitates ; dioxanes which are water miscible solvents and beyond certain concentration of these solvents in the bulk medium inactivates the enzyme .
Now people understood that enzymes cannot be used in the non - polar environment which ultimately proved wrong in atleast for the last twenty years and people have looked at a number of water immiscible solvents which are known to keep enzyme in a very stable confirmation along with the maintenance of enzyme confirmation because the quantity of water required for interaction with the enzyme protein is a very small bound water molecule around the external surface of the molecule which is retained and which is not very easy to be removed by normal dehydration methods .
Unless you subject it to chemical treatments you cannot really remove it by conventional drying methods the bound water present in the enzyme molecule .
In the recent years number of applications have already emerged but on a limited scale and probably the scope it offers is much , much larger than it is being practiced today .
Some of the advantages of organic media for bio - catalysis are : one is many of the reactions which require non - polar substrates lipids mainly are very difficult to carry out in aqueous medium because they are not soluble or the concentration that will be soluble will be very small .
So if you want to carry out those reactions in high concentration you need a non - polar bulk medium and the substrate can be dissolved and then they can be used for enzymatic catalysis .
Another major advantage is the hydrolysis can catalyse synthetic reactions .
That means in the absence of water for hydrolysis which require water as a second substrate or for hydrolysis reaction water is the reactant .
If the water is stripped off or is not present then the reaction can go in the reverse direction and instead of hydrolysis , synthesis can be used and in fact it is in this area a very significant application have emerged where the ester synthesis has been carried out even commercially in fact for some of the very high value products .
Particularly , more importantly for resolution of racemic mixtures which we know that the enzymes are able to recognize one of the isomers the resolution can be carried out in the case of chemically synthesized racemic mixture .
Then many of these can be used for modification of enzyme specificity as far as the reaction is concerned in the organic medium .
It has been also seen that when you subject enzyme molecule into anhydrous organic solvent the enzyme becomes very rigid .
If you put an enzyme molecule into aqueous media , in buffer the molecule in highly mobile .
It interacts with the water molecule freely and it is very mobile but when you put in organic non - polar medium its mobility is drastically reduced .
In fact one of the major Scientist working in this area he has called these as rocks in the organic solvent .
The molecule becomes so rigid that the structure is very rigid and deactivation is impossible .
The molecule becomes rigid ; it doesn ’ t deactivate it retains its activity and that is one of the advantage and during this rigidification lot of modification in the substrate specificity also occurs and this has been noted in many cases and coincidentally bulk of the studies in use of enzymes in the non - polar medium has been in the area of hydrolases mainly lipase and proteases .
They are the two classes of enzymes lipases and proteases which have been extensively studied for variety of reactions .
I will illustrate with some of the examples .
Then reduction of side reactions catalyzed by water .
When water is not present any reaction catalyzed by water is inhibited .
Then higher stability both thermal stability and no problems with microbial contamination because the solvent itself will act as a preservative and not allow any microbial contamination to take place and the enzyme can be stored over a long period of time .
Even operational stability is improved ; as I mentioned that the confirmation becomes very rigid .
It ’ s not possible to alter it during reaction and the mobility is lost .
Another major important factor is better integration with the chemical steps in synthetic sequence where you want to use enzyme as a part of a sequence of reactions in an organic chemical synthesis where the substrate is coming already dissolved in organic solvent you can always integrate enzymatic reaction in the sequence of steps .
Otherwise it was difficult earlier because if the substrate is coming in the solution form in an organic solvent you need to remove the organic solvent put into water medium and then carry out the reaction which is practically not feasible but which can be made feasible if you use the advanced enzymes in the organic medium .
Some of the alternative ways in which enzymes can be used in the organic solvent are shown here .
If you look at the first one , the ‘ A ’ , it is a homogeneous system containing individual enzyme molecules , water and water miscible organic solvent .
Typical example is acetone , water mixture .
You take ethanol water mixture put the enzyme carry out the reactions .
Such a system practically is not very , very attractive because as I mentioned they tend to inactivate the enzyme because water miscible solvents often tend to extract the bound water layer of the enzyme and thereby the confirmation is disturbed .
The second is the use of enzyme in two phase systems ; an organic and water two phase systems where the enzyme is present in the aqueous phase , the substrate is present in the non - aqueous phase ; make an emulsion by agitation or use of surfactant , bring the enzyme and the substrate in close proximity and then carry out the reaction .
In the third configuration .
‘ C ’ , the enzyme is immobilized on water containing porous particles surrounded by organic solvents .
That means you use a hydrophilic support and the hydrophilic support will contain the enzyme particle immobilized along with some water molecules dispersed around it and the whole particle is then immersed as shown in a magnified way here .
The enzyme particles which are hydrophilic contain the water molecules around the enzyme and they are suspended in the bulk organic medium .
The shaded portion indicates the organic medium and the blank spaces are indicated by water medium and the enzyme particles are marked E .
The fourth configuration is the immobilization of the enzyme particle on a hydrophobic matrix .
There is no water present in the proximity of the enzyme molecule and the hydrophobic matrix and the enzyme is immobilized in a hydrophobic patch and it is suspended then in the organic solvent .
The fifth one is solid enzyme particles suspended directly .
You take enzyme particle , dry it and suspend into solvent and because they are not soluble they will tend to form lumps , aggregates that is what these aggregates are shown and they can be used to carry out the reaction .
Then the sixth one is you make reverse micelle by use of surfactant .
You take enzyme in the micro emulsion form and inside the reverse micelle you have the enzyme entrapped in the water cells .
That means the enzyme experiences an atmosphere which is hydrophilic in nature but the whole reverse micelle is surrounded by the organic solvent .
This is the enzyme entrapped in the reverse micelle .
Reverse micelle is just like water in oil emulsion where by you have enzyme entrapped .
Within the reverse micelle the amphipathic molecules make a structure where by all the hydrophobic tails extrude outwards towards the bulk organic solvent and the polar heads are all made into a small network within which the enzyme particle is trapped and some water is also entrapped within the cell and therefore the enzyme remains stable almost as if it is experiencing an aqueous phase .
But the whole particle , as a micelle particle is immersed in the organic phase .
Then you have the last configuration in which enzyme is modified by chemical modification so as to be made soluble in the non - aqueous phase .
One of the well known reported methods is modification of enzyme by coupling to polythene glycol .
If you couple polythene glycol , the whole enzyme molecule becomes soluble in non - aqueous phase and then it can be put into an organic medium and then it behaves almost like a soluble enzyme but in non - aqueous phase .
But again doing covalent modification of this enzyme , you loose lot of activity and there might be some change in the conformation so as to alter substrate specificity in the process .
If you look at the structural understanding of the enzyme what happens when we immobilize either on hydrophilic or hydrophobic matrix ?
Most of the enzymes in organic phase are used in immobilized form .
If you look here this is a free soluble enzyme .
As I mentioned earlier the enzyme molecule is surrounded by water layer and this water layer is essential for the enzyme conformation and activity .
When the bulk solvent is water and the continuous phase is water there is no disturbance on this surrounding layer and the enzyme remains stable for a reasonable period of time .
Due to thermo chemical reasons it might get inactivated but for some time it remains intact .
When you immobilize the enzyme on to a solid matrix , let us say a polymeric matrix , it could be hydrophilic or hydrophobic matrix you generate an interphase with the bulk medium and the polymeric matrix is surrounding the water layer which is maintained during the reaction .
No . Bulk here is organic solvent and here it was water .
In the third case it is a reverse micelle .
Here also you have an interphace which consist of hydrophobic tails .
The fatty acid or whatever lipid molecule you have used for making the micelle , they are arranged such that the hydrophobic heads are diverted inside which form a structure and tails are extruding outside and then you disperse it through the use of surfactant and you have an interface here consisting mainly of the hydrophobic tails which remains very stable in the organic medium .
Although this provides a very neat system for carrying out enzymatic reaction in organic phase , the only problem is the recovery of the product , after the reaction is over , from the system .
Recovery of product means you need to disrupt the micelle , reform the micelle so the reaction cannot be really carried out in a continuous mode and that causes severe problem , operational problem .
But otherwise as a system if you look at this provides you an ideal system because it gives you very large interphase ; it gives you a hydrophobic interface which can remain stable in the …… .
and also enzyme is very stable because it is experiencing the aqueous environment .
The important parameters for the enzyme reactions in organic solvents are the source and presentation of the enzyme .
As I mentioned the variety of forms in which the enzyme can exist either as a free enzyme , immobilized enzyme , soluble conjugate , that is …… enzymes or in microemulsion form either of the way ; that is one parameter and one need to look at the kind of form of the enzyme that gives the best results .
Then the choice of solvent is another feature .
It has been noted in most cases that the solvents which are relatively more non - polar are better suited for carrying out enzymatic reaction mainly because of their lack of interaction with the water layer on the enzyme molecule .
In fact people have defined as far as the choice of solvent is concerned a parameter what they call as log P where P is the partitioning coefficient of the solvent between a particular solvent and octenol .
Octanol is considered to be the extreme non - polar medium and the partitioning coefficient of that solvent between water and octenol is the P value and higher the log P value means it is more non - polar and higher the log P value the better it is a suited solvent for enzyme catalyst .
They do not interact with the essential water layer on the enzyme molecule because of their non - polar nature and therefore the enzyme structure is maintained .
A very important factor is amount of water present .
Almost all the reactions when we want to carry out in organic solvent we also need a very small quantity of water which plays a key role in the catalytic function of the enzyme .
It is a question of debate whether this amount of water required is to maintain the essential water layer in equilibrium or there are some other catalytic functions which require water molecules by the enzyme because so far if you look into reaction mechanisms of enzymes excepting for maintaining the enzymes structure , water has not been seen to play any role .
But once if we say that you have a very high log P value of the solvent which has no miscibility with the water it will not disturb the essential water layer but still a small quantity of water is required in the organic solvents to maintain the catalytic function and there are number of approaches which has been made to provide that small quantity of water and also to strip the water produced in the reaction .
When you talk of hydrolysis being used in the reverse direction for synthetic purposes water will be produced and this water needs to be essentially removed .
On the other hand there is an optimum water concentration which is required but when water is produced water has to be removed rather being added .
Then pH is another feature .
When you carry out the enzyme reaction in an organic solvent the role of pH becomes limited in the sense that as we saw earlier in the effect of pH in enzyme kinetics , the major role was ionization of the amino acid residues in the enzyme protein .
A non - polar solvent will not really allow ionization to take place and therefore pH theoretically must not play any role .
But the role of pH in the case of enzyme reaction in organic solvents has a different connotation and the connotation is that it has been reported by some workers that enzymes unlike many other small molecular weight chemical compounds possess a memory with respect to certain physical features say for example pH .
For dispersing the enzyme into an organic solvent you are starting from enzyme which is already dispersed in some aqueous medium and whatever pH was of that medium , the enzyme retains that pH in the memory and the functional aspect of the enzyme when it is transferred to non - polar medium remains at the same pH .
So you can make different enzyme preparations starting from initial pH in the water medium which have different functional capabilities and by changing the enzyme memory with respect to pH .
Similarly temperature and nature of substrate also are important parameters and they have the similar features as we saw in the case of water in aqueous medium .
Just to illustrate one of the reaction system which we did some work here in IIT itself and the enzyme reactors systems were developed here and used for a number of reactions which I have skipped .
It consists of stirred reactor in which silicon tubing is dispersed into the organic phase and silicon tubing , while it is non - porous to most of the substrates and the products , but it is porous to water vapors and what we do is through silicon tubings we recirculate a saturated salt solution which is known to have a definite water activity .
In fact for calibration of the humidifiers we use saturated salt solution and each salt , when you make a saturated salt solution has definite relative humidity and those salts are circulated so as to maintain a constant water activity in the reactor and even control water activity .
That means this saturated salt solution if more water is produced will take up water and when water will get depleted it will act almost like a water buffer just like a buffer for acids and bases , this acts like a buffer and one can control water activity in organic reaction system and carry out the reaction at a constant water activity .
A number of enzyme catalyzed reactions have been reported like lipases for ester synthesis , interesterifications , transesterifications and resolution of racemic mixtures .
Because each enzyme has specificity towards one of the isomers , substrates can be resolved into respective isomers .
Proteases for peptide synthesis , oxidases for variety of reactions for example cholesterol to cholestenone , butanol to butanaldehyde , p - phenylphenol to phenol - formaldehyde resins , p - cresol to o - quinone and ethanol to hydrogen peroxide .
Even transferase have been used in organic medium for sucrose to levan , a polymer and glucose to fructose isomerisation has been shown to shift the equilibrium constant from fifty percent equimolar in the favor of fructose while when we use in the non - aqueous phase .
Last feature is synthetic enzymes in molecular imprinting .
We know that the enzymatic catalytic function has two key roles : one is binding of the substrate and then certain catalytic function .
So what we need in the case of synthetic enzyme is that we must have kind of a large molecule with a cavity so that a substrate of definite size can fit into it and mimic a binding process .
The other is in the proximity of the cavity there must be some functional groups which can do catalyses and we know that the enzymes also follow the same kind of reaction mechanisms as chemical catalysts do or acid base catalysis , covalent catalysis , or proximity effects ; all those there are experienced in the enzymatic reactions and the similar concepts are being used to synthesize large molecules to mimic the catalytic functions .
In fact one of the most successful attempts has been to use cyclodextrins .
The cyclodextrins are cyclic molecules with six , seven and eight glucose moieties coupled together in a starch .
That means a - 1 , 4 - glucoside linkage .
If you degrade starch you will get dextrins and these dextrins if they are cyclic molecules we call them cyclodextrin and the alpha , beta , gamma cyclodextrins are six , seven and eight glucose molecules linked in the cyclic form .
The peculiar feature of this is that the cyclic molecules make a cavity of definite size in which you can retain the definite molecules and this cyclodextrins are being used to attach by covalent coupling some of the chemical groups which can catalyse the reaction .
If you look at the cavity of cyclodextrin it is almost like a paper and cylinder and on the surface they attach a number of functional groups , the same functional groups which are known to be possessed by and this is for example chymotrypsin analogue .
They have tried to mimic the activity of chymotrypsin ; they have named it also benzyme and some of the functional groups are covalently coupled which are functional in the case of catalysis and such a complex is called a synthetic enzyme .
Many such molecules are likely to come out .
But so far not many synthetic enzymes are available which can carry out diverse function as the normal natural catalyst do .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
In today ’ s lecture , we will continue our discussion which we started on determination of polymer molecular weight .
And today basically , we will continue our discussion ; we had started on gel permeation chromatography or size exclusion chromatography and then briefly discussed mass spectroscopy of polymers in particularly MALDI TOF MS .
Now , this is the last slide we had stopped in last lecture .
Now , this is the typical GPC trace where in the y axis you have detector response and in x axis typically you have elution time , and which can easily become what is in to elution volume .
Now , if you want to convert elution time to elution volume , there should be the pump , which are getting used in the GPC equipment should be pulse free and it should be able to maintain a steady flow typically around 1 ml per minute .
Now , from this raw data we must transform this data as a weight fraction molecular weight distribution which is a plot of weight fraction versus molecular weight .
The requirement for this type of transformation is this , because we know the definition of M n is given by where w is the weight fraction of a polymer chain having molar mass of M i and we can express this in terms of an integral form like this .
So , basically we need to plot this weight fraction distribution against molecular weight to integrate this which will give us M n .
Similarly , M w weight average molecular weight can be obtained from the formula .
So , basically this is example of M n and M w expressed in integral form ; this shows why we require the raw data to be transformed in this type of weight fraction molecular distribution with plot of weight fraction versus molecular weight .
Now , to do that , let us first look at the principle of the separation in gel permeation chromatography .
Remember , we have discussed in the last lecture that you have in gel permeation chromatography the polymers are passed through a columns containing beads which have definite pores .
So , when polymer samples is injected in to this column then the solvent takes away or carries this polymer molecules to the detector and this pores which are in the column are responsible for the separation it brings about .
Now , what happens ?
How the separation happens ?
The flow rate we typically work the GPC ’ s work like in the range of 1 ml per minute .
It is has been that the elution volume does not depend up on the flow rate which means that the polymer samples are not carried away or dragged away by this solvent molecules ; the polymer molecules basically equilibrate between the pores inside and outside , and the higher molecular bonds are resides most of the times outside the pores whereas the smaller molecular what are more size polymer molecules they partition more inside the pore volume ; thus taking longer time to elute .
If we express this mathematically little bit and see what is happening .
See if we consider the elution volume V e for a particular polymer sample as V 0 plus K s c into V i where V 0 is the volume outside the pores whereas , V i is the total volume inside the pores ; and K is K s c is the equilibrium constant which basically is given by the concentration of the polymer sample inside divided by concentration sample outside the pores .
So , for very large size polymer chains which has a larger size does not penetrate in the pore size .
So , K s c is 0 .
So , V e is given by the outside volume and if the polymer is low , the size is very small then almost exclusively they will enter the pores and K s c will be 1 which gives us V e is V 0 plus V i .
So , K s c is basically the equilibrium constant between the concentrations or because of the partition of polymer molecules inside the pores and outside the pores .
Now , from our thermo dynamical knowledge we can simply write the delta G 0 p p is for pore penetration is given by RT l n this equilibrium constant and del G can be written as del H 0 p p enthalpy and T delta S 0 p p .
Now , as we know that in gel permeation chromatography there is no interaction between the polymer molecules and the pores or the column there is no interaction between them .
So , the value of del H for pore penetration must be 0 .
Hence K s c would be given by e to the power del S 0 p p by R .
Now , for a flexible chain it can be statistically shown as this entropy for pore penetration given by this expression where A s is surface area of the pores per unit volume and L dash is the mean molecular projection which is basically given in to diameter for spherical polymer chain which is basically related to size of the polymer .
Now , as you can think that when a polymer molecule goes inside the pores the conformational entropy of the polymer chain get reduced , because the sum of the conformations which requires the central mass to be very closer to the rigid walls of this pores are forbidden which means the conformational entropy of the polymer molecules reduced or get decreased when a polymer molecule goes inside the pores .
And this reduction of entropy becomes more permanent if you have a large size polymer or if you have a small size pore .
So , this entropy of pore penetration is always negative and it becomes more negative if the polymer size grows or the pore size becomes smaller ; and that is expressed by this expression where if the pore size becomes smaller A s goes up ; hence the entropy becomes more negative ; similarly , if the polymers size goes up this becomes higher and this entropy becomes lower .
So , if you look at this expression here and we know K s c is this and ESR is this .
So , we can simply write from these two , V is V 0 plus V i e to the power minus A s L dash by 2 .
So , this is the expression we can write and which shows that V e decreases as decreases with log of polymer size ; log of L hence polymer size .
So , this expression tells us that V e decreases linearly with the polymer size goes up V will go down .
So , you can expect a linear relationship .
So , if we plot log of size against V e you can expect that to be a linear graph .
Now , from Mark Houink and Sakurada equation we know that intrinsic viscosity given by K M to the power a where K and a are constant for a particular polymer solvent temperature combination .
So , I can write log eta M is log K plus 1 plus a log M .
Now , remember from our discussion in solution behavior of polymer molecules a polymer size which is basically hydrodynamic volume V h proportional to eta M .
We have seen this relations before ; hence we can expect from this and this relation , and whatever we have seen here that log has if the K and a remains constant , log M should linearly decrease with elution volume or V e .
So , we expect that instead of log size if we plot molecular weight we can get linear relationship between V e where elution with the size log M goes up , V e decreases .
Now , this two regions are the exclusion limit and they are the cut off for the two regions where the size goes up beyond this molecular weight then none of the polymer chains can go in .
So , they will have elution volume of V 0 and if polymer size becomes lower and lower , and becomes such a low that all of them can penetrate equally in the pores then all will come at the same time , and this become V 0 plus V i .
So , this is the linear region where the polymers get separated .
So , basically from this discussion we can understand that a plot of log M versus elution volume should give a linear relationship and V e should decrease with increase in the log M .
This is what is found in practice when you inject different molecular weight or sample in the GPC column we do actually see that the elution volumes becomes decreases linearly with log M .
And this has been taken advantage to make a calibration curve where known standard very mono dispersed polymers sample which are very low poly dispersity like in this case four samples are shown here .
So , they are injected and their elution volumes are recorded and likewise calibration curve is constructed by injecting many mono dispersed polymer sample .
So , from this calibration curve we can easily convert this elution volume to log molecular weight data .
So , this is the way calibration is done for a GPC ; several mono dispersed polymer sample with known molecular weight are injected in the column and their elution volumes are plotted against log of molecular weight , and such as linear plot is constructed .
So , we can remember what the purpose we were trying to convert this raw data to distribution plotting weight fraction versus molecular weight .
Now , from the calibration curve we can convert the elution volume to the molecular weight .
Now , what about the detected signal ?
Now , for example , if we take a RI detector then this output of this detection signal is proportional to the concentration .
Typically , we use concentration detector .
So , the output signal in this detector is proportional to the concentration and if we assume that detector response is proportional to the concentration in the range we are working , and also this response does not depend on molecular weight .
The output will be similar for a given concentration of different molecular weight .
So , if we assume that the output does not depend on the concentration , not on the polymer molecular weight ; this is the detector signal and this is the elution volume V e .
So , we can simply write the weight fraction d w of the polymer which eluted between V e and V e plus d V e ; we can consider the sample this slice which is very infinitesimal slice .
So , that weight fraction which eluted the polymer between this V e and V e plus d V e .
So , this is again let me repeat this d w is the weight fraction of the polymer chains which eluted between V e and V e plus d V e .
So , this is the weight fraction between the polymer which eluted and they can be written like this where a is the area under this curve ; and if we do interrogation and followed by normalization we can get this weight fraction molecular weight distribution in the form .
So , this is mathematically we can do and this wet fraction distribution can be expressed by this formula where this is the detector signal at V e , and this is molecular weight which we got from the calibration curve for this particular V e , and S V e is the magnitude of the slope for this log M versus elution curve plot for that particular point V e .
Now , we do not have to do ourselves ; now a days fortunately software ’ s are available which can take this and give us this output of this type of output they can give and from which using the formula which we used at the beginning .
So , these are the formulas for M w and M n , we have seen in the beginning of this lecture .
So , now , we know what is w M ?
How the weight fraction distribution varies with molecular weight ?
So , once we know that with the help of the software this things can be easily calculated .
So , we know that from the raw data of GPC trace we can get the number of distribution and weight average molecular weight , and weight molecular rate , and we can also get the other M z , and from the values of K and we can get K v also .
So , let us go back and talk more about the calibration .
Remember , we did calibration in we have taken mono dispersed standard ; standard means half molecular weight and standards , and then injected , and according to their elution volume , and then for the calibration cut we have plotted log M versus V e elution volume .
There are few advantages like this is a simple setup , only one detector is required whether it is a refractive index detector or only one concentration detector and we can do this calibration without knowing exact concentration ; concentration can be variable little bit without no problem and this calibration is very precise and repeatable .
However , there are many disadvantages for this conventional calibration .
For example , if we go back and look at this formula remember , we said that as long as this K and a are constant we can write log m instead of log size to construct this calibration curve .
So , if the value of K and a changes , and that will change for a different polymer even if we keep the solvent same and temperature same ; if we change the polymers the value of K and a will change ; value of K and hence the intrinsic viscosity will change .
So , we will get different curve for a different polymer .
So , these calibration curve between log m log of molecular weight and this elution volume is applicable only for a particular polymer whose K and a are constant .
Whenever we change K and a for a different polymer ; obviously , we get a new set of calibration .
So , this calibration can be obtained used to get a true molecular for weight of polymer .
So , this calibration can be used to get true molecular .
So , the polymer which are same type used and calibration .
So , for example , calibration is done for polystyrene then using this calibration curve we can determine the molecular weight of polystyrene sample only , because the K and a value will remain same for polystyrene only .
Instead of polystyrene , if we change it to polycarbonate then K and a value will change .
So , we cannot use this calibration curve , but most of the times we may we use one set of calibration curve for lot of other polymers which gives us error may be 0 to 30 percent error in terms of the molecular weight .
The reason that we cannot get the calibration curve made for all the polymers , because we cannot get narrow dispersed polymer for all types of polymers ; specially , for coordination polymers , for polycarbonate polyesters , polyamides that is very difficult to synthesize narrow dispersed polymers which SPI is 1.1 or less than that it is very difficult ; and unless we have a narrow dispersed or mono dispersed samples which can be retry standards we cannot use this for calibration .
Hence , this calibration is mostly done with a mono dispersed synthesized with a precise mono dispersed molecular weight like living anionic polymerization .
Typically , this polystyrene , polymethylmethaacrolate they are used as standards for organic solvents , organic soluble polymers and the molecular weights for other polymers are reported agility to polystyrene or polymethylmethaacrolate and for aqua soluble or water soluble polymers ; the standards typically used are say polyethylene oxides which also can be synthesized at very narrow or mono dispersed standards .
So , typically the water soluble monomers are reported relative to polyethylene oxides standards .
Second disadvantage is that if the polymers are different in branching like different shapes like branching or other structural modification we cannot also get that difference captured in the calibration .
Let us go back and explain with those graphs like if you have repolymers as I explaining for a given molecular weight their sizes could be different depending up on the value of K and a intrinsic viscosity , and they can form a different calibration curve .
So , if you use a calibration curve which is constructed for polymer A and use the same calibration curve for polymer B then these error will be erratic ; that is what we are explaining till now .
This is the real example where several polymers are plotted and you can see this each polymer has a different caliber has a unique size to weight relationship .
So , if we use one calibration for the other sample there will be error .
This is what we are talking about the molecular shapes .
Now , for a given molecular rate , if you consider one molecular weight here and keep the molecular weight , and change the shapes like from raw to coil to sphere ; obviously , this sphere will have lowest size then coil then rod .
So , obviously , the elution volume will defer according to size .
For a given molecular weight , the shape of the polymer changes like from rod to sphere to coil then the molecular size changes and the elution volume is related molecular size not molecular weight ; hence , the elution volume also changes .
So , this calibration if it is done for linear polymer we cannot use that for other shaped polymer like branched polymer which will have different shape .
So , there are two advantages we must remember using this calibration once that this is always reported with some non - standards gather always some error and if the calibration cub is done with linear polymers if we find or determine molecular weights of other shapes using that calibration cub there will be also error .
So , what is done ?
To avoid this remember , we talked about again that V h polymer size is proportional to intrinsic viscosity multiplied by molecular weight .
So , if you can find out intrinsic viscosity is a polymer then plot of log eta M , because this gives the polymer size and this elution volume .
So , now this is independent of which polymer you are using as long as we are using log of eta multiplied by molecular weight that gives the size of the polymer whether it is a different shape polymer or different type polymer .
So , you get a universal calibration curve .
So , if you can construct with one of the polymers say polystyrene then the molecular weight of the other polymer can be also determined using this calibration curve ; as long as we know the intrinsic viscosity for the polymers we are using and the elution volume from our GPC curve .
So , as long as we know the intrinsic viscosity of the polymer sample we are using and the elution volume of the sample ; using this universal calibration curve we can get the molecular weight which is fairly accurate .
Now , there are other detectors which can be used now a days modern GPC equipment used like viscometer which can detect the intrinsic viscosity on line in a real time and light scattering detector which can determine the weight average molecular weight online , which basically gives us the scope to find out this molecular weight distribution in actual sense .
For example , if we have GPC with RI plus light scattering detector , the light scattering gives us the limiting excess Rayleigh ratio delta R theta is equal to 0 and if you are working a very dilute solution we can consider concentration c is equal to 0 .
So , from this two , we can get as the samples elute ; we can get the molecular weight data in real time and from RI detection detector we can get the wet fraction automatically .
So , we do not need a calibration curve if we have an absolute molecular weight detector like the light scattering detector .
So , that we can get a molecular distribution ; similarly , if we have RI plus viscosity then viscosity real time gives the eta value and then we can use the inverse of calibration curve to find out this molecular weight distribution .
So , GPC with Tripple detector RI plus viscosity plus LS light scattering , we get molecular weight no standard require you can get absolute molecular weight .
And we also get information about say shapes of the polymer branching etcetera also can be obtained from these detectors .
These are the modern detectors available in the market .
So , with this we come to the end of discussion on gel permeation chromatography .
Before that let us go through few practical points and for example , for organic solvent the beads are typically used as cross linked polystyrene or surface - treated silica gel and for aqueous medium porous beads of cross linked water soluble polymers are used .
The peak resolution is proportional to 1 over d square .
So , basically the bead size grows up the resolution becomes inferior .
So , it is always preferable to get a smaller width size ; for example , nowadays it is 5 micrometer or 10 micrometer at largest we use in actually to get a better resolution .
The resolution also depends on the length of the column , but not as much as the size diameter of the beads ; it is depends on length l to the power half .
So , if you increase the length of the column the resolution goes up .
So , preferably we use longer column ; typically in normal sense , we actually use few column in series and some cases to make the process faster ; we mix bed type columns are used where you have the columns are made with different pore size and you can use two such or three such mix bed columns in series or a single different pore size columns also in series .
Obviously , as you have seen this temperature plays a more important .
So , it is preferable that the column is kept in a constant temperature ; obviously , the sample loading is small from a very dilute solution ; specially , when you are using detectors like light scattering and viscosity there we are assumption the solution is very dilute .
So , that we can consider the specific viscosity divide by c as an intrinsic viscosity and the molecular obtained by light scattering ; there will be less error .
High temperature GPC ’ s are required for crystalline polymer ; crystalline polymers are not typically soluble in room temperature .
So , they are dissolved at a high temperature and the column and the escaped at a higher temperature , and the separation is performed at that higher temperature .
So , we typically use this term high temperature GPC for that ; and very high molecular weight polymers typically more than 6 ; Dalton they are sometimes 6 gram per mole type polymers might get the inside the column , because generation of high shear .
So , we should be careful in using very high molecular weight in determining very high molecular weight in GPC .
And if you have computed system like copolymers blend , we require more than one detector to fully characterize to fully determine molecular weight of those .
Let us move to the next topic ; this is the molecular mass spectroscopy of polymers .
Now , we know that in mass spectroscopy which basically involve the study of mass of an ions and created by ionization of fragmentation , and then determine the electrically at the gas phase .
For example , a molecule is vaporized and then ionized , and then these ions are taken to the detector , and the molecular weight is obtained .
Now , while vaporization the molecules may also get , because it is a high temperature to process the molecules can get degraded also .
But for small molecules which have all the molecules have same molecular weight fragmentation does not matter , because the highest molecular ion will represents the molecular or will give the molecular weight for the small molecule or the molecules ; but in case of polymer , one polymer sample consist of many chains of different lengths or different molecular weight .
So , if the polymer while vaporization is gets fragmented or degraded then while we get the molecular ion distribution , we do not know the distribution is because of the fragmentation or degradation of the high polymer chain or because of the actual presence of the low molecular weight chain in the samples .
So , that it becomes complicated .
So , if you are considering polymer sample this fragmentation of the polymer chain during the vaporization will give you lot of error and that is not acceptable .
So , we must have some mechanism whereby which the polymers can be vaporized without having any degradation or fragmentation of polymer chain .
So , what is the modification done to get the mass spectroscopy polymers ; one soft ionization mechanism is used where will come in a minute using matrix assisted laser desorption ionization or MALDI by which the polymers are vaporized with the help of a matrix without degradation and we also use the second technique called time of flight mass spectroscopy ; and in combination of these two techniques we get MALDI TOF MS matrix assisted laser desorption ionization , time of flight mass spectroscopy which is nowadays very important or very common for polymer samples .
So , we will discuss a little bit of MALDI TOF now .
Let us discuss the MALDI matrix assisted laser desorption ionization .
In this case a dilute solution of polymer sample is mixed with a concentrated matrix solution and the matrix typically of organic acids .
So , basically we make a dilute solution of polymer and they mix with a very concentrated solution of the matrix which are typically organic acids , and a small alicut from this mixture is taken , and applied to the mass spectroscopy plate , and it solidifies as the solvent vaporizes .
So , the small alicut is taken from the mixture and applied to MALDI plate and it solidifies as the solvent evaporates .
The plate is placed in a source of mass spectrometer and a short pulse of high energy if this is a must sample plate , and this is your sample along with the matrix ; and a short pulse of high energy laser is irradiates the target , vaporizing the matrix when a high energy lasers irradiates with the polymer sample along with the matrix gets vaporized and in the vapor phase the polymer actually desorbs from the matrix , and if the polymer is ionized already a charged polymer is fine ; if it is not charged , it is a neutral polymer then we have to add some salt to cationise this polymers .
So , that they can move towards the detector .
So , the neutral polymers are ionized or cationized by protons or metal cations like sodium , Na plus , K plus or say silver plus .
So , this the name as the name suggest we take assistance of a matrix to vaporize by help of a laser radiation and in the vaporized states the polymers gets dissolved from the matrix and then get ionized .
So , this name MALDI comes from there .
So , in MALDI , choosing of matrix is very critical and it needs to optimize for every polymer samples .
It must form uniform solutions with the polymers and the added salt ; it must strongly absorb the laser wavelength .
So , that the vaporization be taken place and it should give rapid vaporization .
The salt you know we said that neutral polymers need that distance from the salt to become cationize and for example , this polyesters , polyamides , polyether ’ s whereas , hetero atom ; salts like sodium , potassium , lithium ’ s are used , because these cations are alkyl metal cations can attach with this hetero atom and cationize this polymer .
The polymers having unsaturations , the silver cation can be used ; it can actually complex with the pi bond ; for example , polystyrene , polybutadiene this polymer cation can be used .
For oliphinic polymers like polyethylene , polypropylene , it is very difficult to find a cation which might complex with these oliphinic polymers ; it is very difficult to cationize and then analyze this polymers by MALDI ; and water soluble polymers already which does not soluble in a solvent is also very difficult .
The solvents must be chosen in such that if you evaporate quickly to give a uniform mixture of the polymer matrix and the salt should quickly evaporate and give the salt .
Let us talk about the mass analyzation time of flight mass analyzer which is basically the source for the mass spectrum source where the matrix is vaporized and polymers are ionized , and then they are taken to the detector , and in this case the time of flight mass analyzer ; the every cation they actually travel same path all the molecular ions travel same path to a detector and the detector measure the time which the ions take to reach the detector ; the heavier ions would take more time to reach the detector where lighter ions ; obviously , will take a lower time move faster to the detector .
So , this is example of one MALDI from PMMA polymethylmethaacrolate and you can see these are the peaks from different polymer chains .
So , this keeps the entire distribution ; this is the normalized intensity and if you look at the gaps between the molecular ions you can see the gaps is 100 Dalton which is exactly the mass for a MMA repeating unit .
So , here you can exactly get the difference in the signals with a molecular weight of the repeating unit .
And from this distribution the different molecular weight like number average molecular weight , weight average molecular weight and other molecules can be directly obtained .
So , this is absolute technique .
So , no calibration is required .
Now , quickly go through advantage of MALDI TOF , it is small amount of sample is required ; very sub milligram sample is required and the analysis happens fast within very few minutes compared to the other techniques ; it is very efficient .
It does not depend whether the polymer structure is a linear structure ; for example , for gel permeation chromatography , we typically use the principles and postulates of the Gaussian flexible polymer chain , but in this case we do not need any polymers having any shapes or any structures can be determined ; and the MALDI TOF very efficiently for low molecular regions very GPC does not work , and other information besides molecular weight averages and the poly disperisty index , the repeat unit mass , the end group mass this are also can be received .
So , just all this benefits , but the only disadvantage is that the price of MALDI TOF is very high .
So , it is not very convenient to use the MLADI TOF in every lab .
So , with this we stop the discussion of determination of molecular weight and we move to the next topic in next lecture .
Today we shall consider various reactor configurations for carrying out enzyme catalyzed reactions You will appreciate from the previous discussion that among the various applications of enzymes and particularly the immobilized enzyme , their utilization for carrying out various chemical transformations is perhaps one of the most important sectors of industrial processing .
This field of application is also more important from the point of view that it has an economical implication particularly because that you have some other alternatives available particularly in the form of chemical transformations with which the enzymatic transformation have to compete and therefore the system has to be optimized up to the complete plant design .
While the major feature of the whole process will include the immobilized enzyme preparation itself but over and above you also need some kind of a hardware , an equipment in which the immobilized enzyme or for that matter even soluble enzyme can play around and catalyze the reaction .
The proper design , proper choice of configuration of these enzyme reactors is therefore very important keeping in view the whole process of economics and which plays in addition to the catalytic function of the enzyme the whole operation will be controlled economically by even the choice of the reactor .
A number of reactor systems are available .
They can be classified in a very general way on the basis of their mode of charging and discharging of the substrate and product stream .
In laboratory experimentation , take a simple stirred vessel in which you take a beaker .
You put it on a magnetic stirrer or you can also insert a mechanical stirrer if you want and then you can add the enzyme particles into it and the substrate can be fed to it .
You can control the pH and temperature of the reaction and you can carry out the reaction in the laboratory .
Here the mode of charging and discharging of substrate is once .
You initially feed the enzyme as well as the substrate and at the end of the reaction take out the final product and enzyme is mixed with it if it is soluble enzyme ; if it is an immobilized enzyme preparation , you can filter it or centrifuge it to recover back .
So that is one of the probably simplest configurations that are possible to carry out an enzyme catalyzed reaction .
The two factors on which the classification of enzyme reactors can be based are on the mode of charging and discharging of substrate and product stream and also physical configuration .
What is the shape of the reactor ?
For example it is a column ; it is a stirred vessel or it could be an ultra filtration cell or what ever kind of configuration is available that also can be used and keeping in view a very broad classification can be given on the basis of batch reactors and continuous reactors and the kind of reactor system that I described a little earlier for experimental purposes fall under batch category .
That means the batch reactors are very suitable for small scale experimental studies mainly because that they are simple in construction and operation and they don ’ t need any supporting structure unlike in the case of continuous reactors where you need to feed the substrate stream continuously so you need a pump .
Similarly at the outlet you also need a pump to withdraw the product stream whereas in the case of batch reactors you just initially charge the reactors and continue under reaction conditions ; then discharge the reactor and at the end of it do cleaning operation .
So no supporting structures are required and therefore they are very simple and they find a very common application in the small scale experimental studies .
In the case of soluble enzymes , the enzyme cannot be separated .
So therefore most of the enzyme reactions that require crude enzyme preparations where no degree of purifications is needed particularly in cases for food or beverage productions , the soluble enzymes are added and they carry out reactions and they go along with the product stream and the enzyme is not required to be separated .
However if we use immobilized enzyme preparation , the separation of the enzyme is feasible by filtration or centrifugation and you can reuse it .
In fact even batch reactors are used in commercial preparations extensively mainly because of their simplicity and ease of fabrication and operational convenience for many reactions .
One typical example is the hydrolysis of penicillin to 6 - amino penicillinic acid , 6 - APA , which is an intermediate for ampicillin .
This is usually done in a repeated batch reactor using immobilized enzyme and the immobilized enzyme is retained in the reactor either by providing a mask for filtering the enzyme to be retained in the reactor or it can be strained after the product stream has been recovered .
Batch reactors also have an important feature for use with the soluble enzymes where most of the continuous enzyme systems are not very suitable .
There are options where even soluble enzymes can be used in a continuous reactor but for practically most applications the use of soluble enzyme is usually with the batch reactors .
The third feature in favor of the batch reactor is the use of insoluble substrates .
While in the case of continuous reactors the use of insoluble substrate particularly using immobilized enzyme preparations is not feasible particularly in terms of reactions being carried out by solid contact which is difficult , for most of the enzyme catalyzed reactions which involve insoluble substrates the batch reaction systems are very ideally suited .
To illustrate with example the insoluble substrates are like hydrolysis of cellulose .
Cellulosic materials are insoluble and the enzyme has to be reacted with this insoluble substrate to hydrolyze into glucose .
Starch hydrolysis also shows a similar behavior ; gelatinous it is not insoluble like particulate matter , but still it is in the form of a gel and after you cook the starch you get a gel and the gel has to be reacted with the soluble enzyme to carry out the liquefaction .
Among the batch reactors there are mainly two types of configurations that are very commonly used ; one is the stirred tank where you use almost like a tank with the stirring facility .
Very often for small scale operations you can have this stirred tank with jacket for temperature control .
On the large scale you can also have coils inserted into the reactor whereby temperature control can be monitored and another advantage is even you can have devices for addition of acids or alkali if pH control is the requirement of the reaction .
In the example I cited a little ago on the hydrolysis of penicillin to 6 - APA because of simultaneous acid production you need to control the pH otherwise the enzyme gets inactivated and a very precise control of pH is needed and therefore addition of the alkali simultaneously is a must and which can be carried out very easily in a stirred batch reactor and with a control system you can control the pH .
The extent of reaction can also be monitored by the quantity of alkali consumed because stoichiometrically the quantity of acid produced is same as the extent of conversion of penicillin to 6 - APA .
The other modified form is a packed bed reactor particularly when we are talking of immobilized enzymes and the enzyme now in the form of either spherical particles , globules , chips , membranes then can be packed into a column and make a packed bed and the reactor can be operated in a batch mode in the total recycle .
In the second case of recycle reactor , if the product outlet is closed and the total enzyme is then recycled back into the feed , the whole operation can be carried out over a period of time which is a batch reaction time .
It can act as a batch immobilized enzyme reactor where with the total recycle packed bag , the total recycle mode .
The only constrain or the assumption here to be considered from the quantitative point of view as the batch reactor or as a perfect mixed batch reactor will be that the cycle time of the substrate must be very , very small compared to the total batch time .
For a perfect total recycled reactor to be considered as a batch reactor operation the requirement should be that the total recycled time must be very small or negligible compared to the total batch cycle ; that is the recycling has to be very fast .
In the case of batch reaction at any given time all the enzyme must be in contact with the total substrate feed .
So to achieve that the recycle time must be very small or the recycling has to be very fast and therefore these two kinds of reactor systems are very commonly used as batch reactor .
The second category and probably which is of most significance to us as in the case of immobilized enzyme systems are continuous flow reactors because the major purpose of the immobilizing enzymes is to use them in continuous modes or repeated mode .
You can use the batch reactors also in case of repeated mode .
But more conveniently they can be used in the form of the immobilized enzymes in continuous reactors .
Three major classes of continuous reactors are listed here .
You have continuous stirred tank reactor and the classical feature of a continuous stirred tank reactor is it is a type of a stirred reactor in which you give a continuous supply of substrates in the form of feed and the same volume at the same rate the product stream is taken out while retaining the immobilized enzyme preparation in the reactor stream .
The major characteristic feature of the continuous stirred tank reactor often denoted as CSTR is that the contents of the reactor are perfectly mixed or the system is totally homogeneous .
That means the concentration of any particular species in the reaction system is uniform through out the content of the reactor and this concentration is same as that in the outlet stream .
The concentration of any specie of a reaction system is homogeneous same at every point in the reactor and that is equal to the concentration at the product stream because it is a perfectly mixed system .
These characteristics makes a very unique situation and whenever contents in the reactor are at the same composition as in the product stream it implies that the concentration of the substrates in the reactor is at a level which is present in the outlet stream .
For example if you want to carry out a conversion of let us say a 95 % leaving back 5 % of the substrate that means the concentration of the substrate in the reactor will be only 5 % of that of the feed inlet .
So the effective concentration of the substrate at which the reaction is taking place is much smaller than the substrate inlet stream concentration and therefore such reactions will be ideally suited for the enzyme catalyzed reactions which are strongly substrate inhibited because the effective substrate concentration in the reactor will be much lesser than the actual substrate concentration in the feed stream .
So the inhibitory effect will be totally masked .
On the other hand if the reaction is inhibited by the product then such reactors are not very suitable because the content in the reactor will also have a very high product concentration at any given time .
So therefore the reaction will always continue in a product inhibited design .
So the reaction rate can be very slow .
So therefore the reactors in the form of continuous stirred tank reactors are ideally suited for substrate inhibited reactions rather than product inhibited reactions .
So that is one feature .
The second category is plug flow reactors .
Plug flow reactors or in a much boarder sense you can say packed bed reactors are probably one of the most commonly used types of reactors in the immobilized enzyme applications mainly because of the nature of the catalyst .
Because it is used in the form of either particles or films it can be easily packed in the system and can provide a very high catalyst density , enzyme density in the reactor system .
Higher the catalyst density the over all reaction rate can also be very high because the enzyme concentration per unit volume will be much higher compared to a CSTR .
But the basic characteristics of plug flow reactor is that the substrate inlet stream moves do they flat concentration profile or velocity profile along the length of a reactor ?
Consider an enzyme reactor .
This is an enzyme reactor , a plug flow reactor and then consider the central axis , the velocity profile of the feed .
This is s ; this is the product stream .
The concentration profile of the feed at any given cross section of the reactor is flat .
That means there are no actual dispersions and so the velocity profile of the feed stream throughout the length of the reactor is flat or in other words the feed inlet , the feed stream moves almost like a plug and therefore the name what we talk about as a plug flow reactor .
They are packed bed systems and achieving a perfect plug flow condition may not be feasible in large scale reactors while in the case of small scale reactors by manipulating or by increasing the length to diameter ratio one can achieve a much better plug flow behavior .
But in the case of large reactors there are lot of deviations from the plug flow behavior which we will consider .
They can be accounted in while we consider the reactor performance .
The third category of the continuous reactors are fluidized bed reactors .
They are somewhere between the continuous stirred tank reactors and the plug flow reactors and if you put the substrate feed at a speed high enough to lift the bed or fluidize the bed but not allow the catalyst particle to go out of the reactor , unlike in the case of a packed bed there is a static bed of the immobilized enzyme particles and the linear velocity of the feed is not large enough so that the bed can be disturbed .
The characteristics of the bed can be theoretically numerically accounted by voidage what we call as a factor called epsilon which is the wide volume in the bed divided by the total packed bed .
This will be a function of the particle shape and size .
Particle shape and size will control the voidage in the packed bed but when you move ahead from the plug flow behavior and continue to increase feed velocity stream to a level that the bed is packed , bed is disturbed .
It gets fluidized ; the particles are fluidized in the reactor system almost like as shown here in the reactor but not to the extent that the catalyst particles are driven out of the reactor system .
They are retained in the reactor system .
We call it fluidized bed ; fluidized bed immobilization reactor .
Such reactors in terms of fluid dynamics probably provide a performance somewhere in between the CSTR and PFR but are ideally suited for the reactions which have a requirement of good heat and mass transfer because in many of the situations like in packed bed the heat and mass transfer may be very difficult and particularly in case of reactions which are exothermic in nature there might be lot of local heat hot spots which can inactivate the enzyme .
Fortunately in the case of enzyme catalyzed reactions , the reactions are not highly exothermic .
They are usually isothermal and therefore the problem of heat transfer is not so severe .
But even a smaller level of heat generated can be taken care very easily in case of fluidized bed reactors .
Alternatively if your substrate is highly viscous or let us say colloidal in nature , in those cases also a fluidized bed reactor can provide you a much better system for carrying out immobilized enzyme reactions in a continuous mode .
These are the three major classes of continuous reactors but in practice a number of hybrids of these reactor systems have been proposed by people both in the case of CSTR as well in the case of plug flow reactors .
In fact fluidized bed reactor itself is a hybrid between the two major classes .
But even under CSTR a modification which has been proposed is in the form of CSTR coupled with the ultra filtration cell .
Particularly in case where you want to carry out reactions using insoluble substrates or soluble enzymes and want to use a continuous reactor .
For a soluble enzyme you cannot use a plug flow reactor .
So CSTR coupled with an ultra filtration reactor can be easily used for carrying out a reaction with the soluble enzyme or with insoluble substrates .
In the case of soluble enzyme the use of plug flow reactor will drive away the enzyme simultaneously and you cannot use it continuously .
In the case of a CSTR , you can use a soluble enzyme or along with a soluble or insoluble substrate by carrying out in a CSTR and coupling the CSTR with the ultra filtration module .
That is the reactor output instead of going directly to the product stream passes through ultra filtration unit in which the product stream is filtered out and can be taken out of the product stream while the retentate which contains mainly the enzyme is recycled back into the reactor .
So it is a form of recycle reactor just like we saw in the case of total recycle packed bed which operates the batch reactor or even in continuous reactor recycle reactors can be used where part of the output stream is recycled and part is taken out as the product .
In this case here we do the same thing ; a part of the output stream which is the filtrate from the ultra filtration unit is taken out to the product stream and the retentate of the ultra filtration unit is cycled back into the reactor and it can be operated in a continuous shift .
So overall performance wise in terms of the reactor performance it can be considered almost similar to that of a CSTR .
There are two major modifications which has been proposed in the case of plug flow reactors .
While the conventional systems as we have seen use the packed bed and feed the substrate in either at the top of the column or at the bottom of the column either of the combination is feasible but they may also have some operational problems .
Of the two major modifications of that which have been proposed and have been used in the enzyme catalyzed reaction , one is a hollow fiber reactor .
In the case of hollow fiber the system is something like in a shell and tube reactor ; shell and tube heat exchanger type of situation where you have very fine capillary type of fibers which are semi permeable in which the enzyme can be entrapped .
The enzyme feed is put in , in the hollow fibers and the main feed substrate is passed through the cell side and because of the semi permeability of the hollow fiber membranes the substrate and the enzyme can come in contact .
That means the substrate can go into the vicinity of the enzyme and product can go out and ultimately the product stream can be taken out but the enzyme cannot go out of the ultra filtration tubes and such a reaction system has an advantage that you can use such a system as a continuous plug flow reactors even using the soluble enzymes .
While a packed bed system cannot be used in the soluble enzyme but a hollow fiber reactor can be used in soluble enzyme and particularly where contacting an enzyme and the substrate is a problem such reactors have been used and in terms of flow behavior , because of these hollow fibers being of the capillary size , very fine capillaries and a bundle is made so they almost provide a reactor performance in line with the plug flow barrier No .
In the hollow fiber tubes , capillary tubes is the enzymes contained and in space provided between the tubes and the cell the substrate feed is fed into it .
You are referring to this one .
This is only a cross section of the system .
In fact all the tubes at the top are joined in a section so that they come out in the same section .
This is only a cross section shown here in the expanded form .
The circles which you are seeing here they are blown up here in this form and they indicate one hollow fiber .
The whole reactor consists of a bundle of hollow fibers almost about eighty or hundred hollow fibers can be constituted in about one square inch of that order hollow fiber .
But there are systems reported in which they are on the tube walls .
The enzyme can be immobilized but alternatively in the general fashion it can also be in the form of soluble enzyme .
When you say when you are immobilizing on the walls of the tube then they don ’ t operate really on the hollow fiber reactor .
Then it is almost like a packed bed reactor in which the tube side is used as the matrix and it is almost like a packed bed reactor .
It doesn ’ t matter whether you pack it in a horizontal fashion or a vertical fashion the tubes are used as the immobilized matrix whereas I am talking about that the enzyme which is used in the soluble mode .
It is retained in the semi permeable hollow fiber tubes so that it is not able to go out almost similar to microencapsulation where the enzyme is contained in the forms of tubes .
The other noble modification of the plug flow system is a spiral membrane bound module .
It is a very specific configuration which has been reported and has been used industrially and this system has been used extensively for immobilized enzyme preparations which are in the form of thin films .
The typical application which reversed is where the enzyme is immobilized on the collagen matrix in the form of thin films and you get a very long roll .
It can even also be used along with , like your fiber entrapped enzymes , if the fibers are woven in the form of a cloth or thing like that so that you get a very large surface area in the form of a film , long film .
What is done is that this thin film of the enzyme containing enzyme is bound spirally on to central core .
You take a central core on which spirally the enzyme sheet is wrapped around the core and in between to provide strength there is a matrix or there is a kind of a porous sheet which can keep the two enzyme sheets separated .
It serves two purposes ; one is that it provides strength to the enzyme sheet .
The other is it also doesn ’ t allow the enzymes system to get clogged and that can be packed into a column into a tube and such a system also can provide a very high enzyme loading because the surface area available on the thin film is very , very large and therefore it can provide a very high enzyme loading and also the system performs almost like a plug flow reactor .
It operates almost like a packed bed system .
Only thing is instead of packing the column with the particulate material what you are doing is the film is being wrapped along a core spaced by another sheet and then the whole core is inserted into a column .
So you can feed the substrate either from the top or the bottom and take out another stream .
It is almost like a plug flow reactor .
I must say that this is not the comprehensive list of the type of the reactors that has been reported .
Very large variations of reactor designs have been reported .
Even for example in the case of a CSTR people have immobilized the enzyme on to the base of the …… and carryout the reaction .
So a variety of configurations had been used but some of them are purely of catalytic interest also .
But by and large from the fluid dynamics and reactor performance point of view they have to be classified on one of those standard operational modes .
To sum up the type of reactors that are available the combined continuous stirred flow reactors with the ultra filtration system is useful with the soluble enzyme or along with the immobilized enzyme particularly by an insoluble substrates are required to be handled or colloidal substrates are required to be handled .
Because in the handling of colloidal substrates , you often find difficulty with the flux flow reactors .
So the combined CSTR coupled with the ultra filtration reactor can be easily used .
Such reactors had been very poor in terms of long term operations mainly because of the adsorption of the enzyme on to the membrane surface .
So most of the membranes provide a good adsorption surface and the enzymes get adsorbed on to that and the reactor performance is … .
during continuous use .
All the defects or all the limitations of an ultra filtration system will also be associated here .
The reaction system will have to face all the problems like concentration polarization of an ultra filtration system and unless those are taken care the reaction performance will be adversely affected .
One is that the system undergoes a very fast rate of deactivation mainly because you have to transfer the whole material along with the substrate into the ultrafiltration module and recycle back the retentate and so during that transfer there is a significant loss occurring .
In most of these one of the reasons of activation is also … .
inactivation and in case of even CSTR many of the enzymes or the carrier particles that are … .
sensitive or carriers which can go undergo lot of attrition during use the CSTR becomes a sort of a disadvantageous system because if the carrier particles get disintegrated during use it will involve the loss of enzyme .
In the case of CSTR , the most favorable point is that for reactions which are substrate inhibited , CSTR is a desirable feature .
The other desirable feature of the CSTR is that it can be used wherever pH control is required because it provides you an open configuration in which the pH monitoring and control both can be exercised which is very difficult in the case of a plug flow reactor .
In the case of a plug flow reactor you have a recycle system so that have an external loop in which the pH monitoring and control is exercised or otherwise in the ideal plug flow behavior the pH control is difficult .
But the CSTR provides an ideal tool and in many cases of immobilized enzyme reactions pH control is a requisite .
Then in the case of CSTR even colloidal or insoluble substrates can be processed which is not feasible in the case of plug flow behavior and then easy replacement of catalyst .
While in the case of PFR or the plug flow reactor the regeneration of the carrier is simple because after the immobilized enzyme is exhausted one can stop for a while regenerate the carrier , reimmobilize the system and reuse .
If suppose the carrier cannot be regenerated and it has to be replaced the replacement of carrier is much simpler in the case of CSTR .
We have talked about higher yields for reaction undergoing substrate inhibition .
Then in the case of plug flow reactors often it has been noted that the conversion efficiencies are much higher compared to CSTR and the major reason for that are two .
We will see the quantitative analysis of the reactor performance in both the cases .
But one of the major reason is that most of the enzyme reactions are inhibited if not very excessively but mildly by product concentration .
So the plug flow maximizes or minimizes the product concentration at any given point .
The maximum product concentration is only at the outlet stream but across the reactor length the product concentration is much lesser than the outlet stream as the opposite happens in the case of a CSTR .
So the reactor performance is much better usually in the case of PFR .
The second reason is that the enzyme loading per unit volume is much higher in the PFR compared to the CSTR .
In the CSTR , the concentration of the enzyme which you can …. .. usually is not very high when compared to the PFR .
The other category of enzyme reactor , fluidized bed reactor , as I mentioned earlier are much better suited for heat and mass transfer characteristics and freedom from plugging .
Very often if colloidal substrates are to be used a plug flow reactors faces problem in terms of plugging or choking of the column .
Insoluble substrates can be used .
Pressure drop will end the problem in the plug flow reactor because if you want to eliminate some of the problems associated with the internally bound diffusion in the system , the particle size has to be reduced and the reduction of particle size will mean increase in pressure drop across the bed and increase in pressure drop across the bed ultimately puts an economic barrier in terms of higher energy consumption for feeding the substrates and therefore in the case of very fine particles you can handle the system in a fluidized bed reactor without much pressure drop problems .
One of the disadvantage is the power requirement for fluidizing the beds because you need to feed the substrate at the very high linear velocities which requires a much higher power consumption and the scale up of the fluidized bed reactors has also been very largely empirical .
The scale up systems is more empirical compared to CSTR and PFR which are considered to be idealized reactor systems because in terms of fluid flow behavior they represent the two extremes .
In one there is no actual dispersion ; in the other case there is complete back mixing .
So therefore their modeling or their arriving of electrode performance is much certain , much more defined and therefore the scale up can be easily carried out whereas in the case of fluidized bed reactor a scale up is more empirical .
There will not be much pressure drop because just like in the case of a packed bed reactor the particles are all compact .
So when you feed a substrate the pressure drop will be very large if the particle size is very fine .
In the case of a fluidized bed reactor the voidage is very high .
The voidage is almost approximating to that of CSTR ; not the same but it is approaching to that and therefore there is no pressure drop and the system has a very large voidage ; the voidage increases .
Before we go into the reactor performance of different types of reactor for the immobilized enzyme systems , we cannot normally consider all the parameters like non - ideal fluid dynamics , the mass transfer constraints and along with the biochemical reaction we cannot really combine at one stage .
We can take up those issues one by one and to begin with we can only consider an idealized enzyme reactor system .
We would like to make certain assumptions before we go into the reactor performance and the assumptions are that first thing we are assuming that the reactor undergoes an isothermal operation .
That means ?
H value of the reaction is not very high so that there is no temperature gradient in the reaction ; the first assumption .
Second is uniform enzyme distribution .
In practice there are reports that even in an immobilized enzyme preparation itself there are no uniform enzyme distribution practically .
But for theoretical purposes , we assume that the enzyme is distributed uniformly in the reactor whether it is a plug flow reactor or is a batch reactor or a CSTR .
The third condition is we are assuming either a plug flow behavior for packed bed or a completely back mix behavior for CSTR in terms of fluid dynamics .
We are not considering anywhere that means even fluidized bed is not considered as an idealized reactor system .
So we are considering the two extreme conditions either a plug flow behavior or a completely back mix system .
Then we are also ignoring external film or internal pore diffusion limitations if any .
We are considering that there are no diffusional limitations .
That means the rate of reaction is much slower than the rate of diffusion .
The rate of diffusion is fast enough .
Then the last assumption is that there is no significant partitioning of substrate between bulk and the carrier phase .
If the system follows such we can evaluate or conduct a reactor performance on the basis of biochemical reaction , their reaction kinetics and to do so the major reactor design parameters which have to be considered are listed here .
The first one is “tau ” which is the reactor space time in terms of V / Q .
Here V is the reactor volume and Q is the flow rate in the case of a continuous reactor .
“tau ” in the case of the batch reactor is the batch reaction time .
Then you have initial substrate concentration ; another parameter which we have to define in any problem of a immobilized enzyme or soluble enzyme reactor we first define the S0 , the batch time or the reactor space time in continuous reactors .
Then the total enzyme concentration in the system .
When I say E0 , I think it will be desirable to also have the magnitude of kd , the deactivation constant .
Particularly it will be more important when we are talking of continuous operation where the reactor operation time is large enough the deactivation constant will also play a key role .
Then the temperature of operation because deactivation also will depend on the operational temperature .
I would like to mention here that most continuous enzyme reactors are usually operated little below their optimum temperatures just to increase or reduce the kd values and increase the operational half life .
Then pH ; pH here is not only monitoring but more important is the control of pH .
How are you exercising control of pH ?
Then fraction of conversion in the reactor which can be defined as ( S0 - S ) / S0 .
That means the concentration difference ; substrate concentration between the inlet and the outlet stream , the ratio of the two .
Then the reactor productivity is another parameter which is important .
X.S0 / tau .
X.S0 is the total product formed and tau is the space time per unit time , the amount of product formed per unit time .
If we consider S0 as the concentration term so that it becomes per unit volume also .
Then the reactor capacity ; although under given set of conditions you may get certain kind of productivity for a reactor capacity will be given by the Vm .
k2.E0.V.e * .
Here even in case of tau also we can multiply by voidage if you want to consider a broader picture of a packed bed reactor because this V , reactor volume is not the packed bed volume it is the volume of the fluid in the reactor .
So the total bed multiplied by the voidage will give a fluid volume in the reactor .
In the case of CSTR voidage can be considered almost equal to one whether the volume occupied by the carrier is very , very small compared to the total reactor volume .
Then reaction capacity can be given by k2.E0 which is Vm multiplied by the reactor volume and the voidage and then finally the important parameter is enzyme kinetics itself because the reactor performance will depend upon the reaction kinetics which controls the reaction .
Mind that we are not considering under idealized reactor conditions .
Anything like diffusional limitations , partitioning effects and non - ideal fluid flow behaviour which we will consider subsequently one by one to arrive at the final reactor performance .
Pr is reactor productivity and Cr is the reactor capacity .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry and in this lecture number 22 , we are going to continue our first half our discussion on chain copolymerization .
We will cover the remaining parts of the chain copolymerization discussion we are having .
And then take from there I will start a new topic or new synthetic procedure namely ring opening polymerization .
Now , if you look at the slides we had during last 2 lectures the in our discussion on chain copolymerization , we basically covered these topics different types of copolymers , importance of copolymerization , and copolymer composition .
Then microstructures , alternate random blocky structure , how the reactivity difference between the monomers actually give this type of copolymer microstructure .
And we have talked about copolymerization composition drift with time and then we talked about how the monomer reactivity ’ s and different types of chain initiation , you know types of chain initiation , actually determine these values of the reactivity ratios .
In today ' s lecture we will just cover this treat of care we will talk about Q e scheme and then briefly about ionic copolymerization how that is different from radical copolymerization .
And just a brief idea about the type of application this copolymers goes .
Now , in the last lecture we talked about different factors contributing to the reactivities of this the monomers and in turn the reactivity ratio the value of the reactivity ratio of these monomers .
We talked about the resonance stabilization of the substituted group , we talked about the electron charge density , electronic charge density , we talked about the steric effect and so on .
Now , all these factors actually contribute to the reactivity of the monomer in such a way that it is very difficult to distinguish , the contribution from each of these factors in the reactivity of the monomers .
Hence it is very difficult to get a quantitative idea or is very difficult to predict the reactivity ratios of the monomers from a given structure .
Nonetheless one semi empirical method proposed by Price and Alphre is often used very commonly to sort of get the reactivity ratios of different monomers , and a ranking between different monomers in terms of their reactivities .
And that is a semi empirical approach and this is the Q e ' s Q e scheme we are talking about .
And this is we talking a continue our discussion on radical copolymerization so it is applicable for radical copolymerization .
And this scheme is based on the assumption that the rate constant , rate constant of reaction between a propagating radical P this is a propagating radical P with a monomer , monomer m .
Now this rate constant can write k P m this is rate constant for reaction between a propagating polymer radical P and a monomer m is given by these expression , where this 2 terms are the reactivity measure of the reactivity of the polymer like radical .
And this is the measure of reactivity of the monomer and this two term e p and e m they are the measure of the electronic charges , electrostatic charges on the polymer radical and the monomer respectively .
So , if I write from this the expression for r 1 which is given by k 1e 1 by k 1 2 I should write .
Now , this both cases the polymer radical is the same so this will get cancelled .
So , I can write q for m 1 q for m 2 for 1 , 1 , 1 e m 2 , you can get the expression from k 1 1 for k 1 1 k 2 and so the ratio you get these two , this because is the same radical 1 and 1 .
So , this cancel out so we get these were this is a the measure of reactivity of monomer 1 and this is the measure of reactivity of monomer 2 .
This is the charges electrostatic charges on the polymer radical and the monomer .
Now , another assumption is made in this approach is that e p 1 is same as e m 1 and we can and we write this as e 1 .
Assumption is that the electrostatic charge on the polymer radical , which has at the end in monomer 1 structure and the electrostatic charge on monomer is same .
And which will I think as e 1 so similarly , we can write e p 2 e m 2 as e 2 .
So , again the assumption is that the electrostatic charge on the polymer radical and the monomer are same , if the monomer residual end of the polymer radical is same as the monomer we are talking about .
So , if I can write , similarly for r 2 Q now because Q is always talking about related to monomer .
So , we can ignore or remove this term monomer m we can just write Q 1 and Q 2 .
So , now we can write Q 1 and Q 2 and we have seen r 1 Q 1 by Q 2 exponential minus e 1 minus e 2 essentially these 2 relates the reactivity ratios of the monomers to the electrostatic charge on the monomer .
We do not have any charm which is related to the polymer radicals , these are all the terms are related to the monomer .
So , basically this relates to the reactivity ’ s of the two monomers and the electrostatic charge on the two monomers .
Now , if we multiply these two we get this value for r 1 , r 2 which is basically the measure of we have seen earlier is a measure of alternating tendency .
If it is close to 0 then they the will monomer will produce the alternating microstructure , if they are close to 1 then the 2 monomers will produce a random copolymer .
And if they are equals both are equals to 1 then obviously r 1 r 2 will be equal to 1 then that will be exactly random copolymers .
So , r 1 , r 2 will be given by if we can multiply these two given by exponential minus e 1 minus e 2 square .
Now , this expression is in sink with our understanding till now .
Now , if e 1 is a very close to e 2 , that means the electronic charges of the double bond in the monomers are very close , then obviously this will become close to 1 and we get a random copolymers , random copolymers .
Now , if the double bond for the two monomer has different electrostatic charge , if they are then they are what will happen r 1 and r 2 would be close to 0 .
That means they are reactivity they will produce a more copolymer , which is more closer in alternate , alternate copolymer than a random copolymer .
If e 1 minus e 2 goes up then it will be in an extreme because e 1 and e 2 will get a r 1 , r 2 close to 1 which will give ideal copolymerization as we expect .
And if they are think if this goes down so they are there equal and then we get these if they are different then r 1 r 2 will be closer to 0 , producing a alternate copolymer which is in sink with our understanding , whatever we have discussed till now .
Now , how do you get this values for Q and e now arbitrarily it has been assigned styrene .
Styrene has been assigned so arbitrarily a value of Q is 1 and e is 1.0 and 0.8 .
And you and rest of the monomers are compared with the value of styrene , what you individual monomers or copolymerized with styrene and from the experimental values of r 1 and r 2 , you can use these expressions where if you consider 1 as styrene .
And then you know Q 1 you know u 1 , hence you will from these to expression and you also know r 1 from experiment r 1 r 2 from experiment .
So , from using these to expression you will be able to find out the values for Q 2 and e 2 .
So , monomers are copolymerize with styrene and you get the experimental values of r 1 r 2 and from known values of styrene having Q is 1 and e is minus 0.8 , you can get the unknown values for the second monomer .
And once you get the individual values for different monomers , they are those values of Q and e are further defined by copolymerizing monomers other than styrene .
Basically first copolymers as we styrene , get the experimental values of r 1 and r 2 get from the expression you get Q and e for the unknown monomers .
And then if we find further this values of Q 1 , Q and e for the other monomers by taking copolymers between them .
Now , obvious this is Q is measure of reactivity as we have seen and e is measure of electrostatic charge .
So , if Q goes up the reactivity will go up and e goes down the value of e goes down because it is a measure of electron density , electrostatic charge .
So , basically electron density on the double bond if there ' s a electron donating group then the electronic density or the electrostatic charge will go up , then Q value will be going up .
And if this electron withdrawing group which basically reduces the electron density on the double bond .
And hence the electrostatic charge it will be more of a lower number .
So , electron density t goes down and electron density goes up and the value is negative e is negative , when the double bond in say this monomer the double bond it is electronic rich compared to a ethylene molecule it is a simple double bond .
So , if you so if you look at few data ' s of the numbers for Q and e the styrene is arbitrarily taken as 1 and minus 8 minus 0.8 .
And if you compare with other monomers so like other conjugate diene like isoprene and butadiene because there they can easily stabilize the radical by resonance , their reactivity is high so Q is high .
And they also basically act as electron donating group so increase the electron density in the double bond .
So , basically this value is negative and is negative means is equal to electron rich , negative is a charge for electron .
So , negative means electronic rich .
Now , if you compare the monomers having electron withdrawing groups like M M A and acrylonitrle , the reactivity comes down compared to styrene because they cannot stabilize as much as styrene can do a propagating radical .
Whereas , because they have electron with drawing group , the charge on the double bond actually lower , it is a more positive charge .
So , you get a positive value and acrylonitrle is more strong electron withdrawing group .
So , it has a positive value compared to M M A .
And compare this vinyl chloride and vinyl acetate , which is basically as we have known from our earlier discussions done in several times .
The reactivity is very low because they cannot stabilize the radical the propagating radical so their reactivities are low so Q values are low .
And they are dead basically they are weekly donating all the withdrawing groups so values are very low either positive or negative depending up on what is the electron with drawing effect or electron donating effect .
Look at this monomer maleic anhydride we know the structure of maleic anhydride .
Now , this is this is a very two very strong electron withdrawing group , so basically the electrostatic charge will be much more positive compared to a ethylene group .
And that is why the value for e is quite high positive 2.25 and these values will vary it is not that these values are very fixed values , but these value might vary little bit depending up on the condition of the reaction among .
So , but the trend will be mentioned so absolute values of this monomer Q and e value might change , but the trend will always remain same depending irrespective of the condition .
And the because it cannot stabilize the radical much so we are reactivities also comes down .
So , in general we can write that if monomer can stabilize the resonance , the propagating radical the resonance the reactivity is high .
Then Q would be greater than 5 , if they cannot stabilize by resonance them Q would be lower so basically Q is a measure of resonance stabilization .
Now , we can so if you know these values , when we know that if the two monomers which are having very electrostatic charge , having very positive charges like acrylonitrle and maleic anhydride .
They will be difficult to copolymerize on the other hand if you take maleic anhydride the monomers are very much electrostatically positive .
So , homo polymerization of maleic anhydride is very difficult , it does not happen .
Now , if you take maleic anhydride and copolymerize with something which has a negative value of e .
That means they have a electron positive electron rich double bond .
Then obviously there will be attraction between the two polar polarities and there will be possibilities for the copolymerization will be much easier .
So , whereas , maleic anhydride does not homopolymerize it can easily copolymerize with butadiene or styrene because their charges are opposite .
So , the monomers can attract each other and do the reaction .
So , basically now we know that with these how to both Q and e and how the basis of these values Q and e how to experimentally or semi empirically get these values of Q and e in comparison to arbitrarily they assigned values of styrene .
And from the these values of Q and e we now can predict whether two monomers can will copolymerize or not and they are for their ranking in their activities also .
So , with these we will move to we will basically completed our discussion on radical copolymerization , we will move and discuss very briefly about ionic copolymerization .
And ionic copolymerization and not very often done you know , typically as we have said earlier in our discussion earlier lectures that are an carrying out ionic polymerization is always difficult .
So , unless there is a specific requirement like you are making a specialty polymers like then there is no point of making these polymers by these ionic methods .
That is why this copolymers are not usually synthesized by doing ionic copolymerization from a mixture of two or more monomers .
But copolymerization is done by ionic polymerization to make block copolymers , where you first make a block of 1 monomer and then add the second block to get a block copolymers .
Nonetheless if you compare ionic copolymerization and with radical copolymerization we can understand the differences and the in that way we can understand , say the characteristics of ionic copolymerization .
Now , unlike radical copolymerization this ionic copolymerization is much more selective , you know .
Not many monomer they undergo copolymerization , the number of co monomer here you can choose which you can use to make a copolymer by ionic method is limited .
And we know that in case of radical copolymerization basically there are numerous options where you can choose two monomers and make a copolymer from there .
And we know that cationic copolymer the monomers , which are having electron donating group as a substituent copolymer .
We will copolymerize by cationic method and the monomers having electron withdrawing group as a substituent under the copolymerization with ionic method .
Typically or generally the tendency of this copolymerization are towards ideal behavior because when as I said that the number of monomers are limited .
So , only those monomers , which are having reactivity towards the cation they undergo cationic polymerization and the monomers , which have reactivity towards and they go they undergo anionic copolymerization .
So , we have the monomers which have undergo ionic copolymerization their reactivities are not too different .
So , they typically or generally have a ideal type they make a typically ideal copolymers .
And of course , like a the homopolymerization we have discussed the reactivity of a ionic polymerization , which will depend up on the initiator you are choosing and the medium polarity solvent polarity and the temperature .
So , if you talking about copolymerization the values r will change with the different types of initiators , medium polarity and temperature .
Some examples of the commercial copolymers as you said earlier the styrene is very styrene homo polymer or polystyrene , polystyrene is a very brittle polymer which breaks easily and also its having poor a very poor solvent resistance or chemical resistance .
So , to improve what is done styrene is copolymerized with acrylonitrle , where the amount of acrylonitrle is limited to 10 to 40 percent by which you can or the solvent resistance property of styrene is improved .
So , this copolymer has improved solvent resistance property compared to polystyrene , but acrylonitrle is also brittle so poly acrylonitrle .
So , brittle that if this copolymer does not have a significant improvement over , over the polystyrene molecule homo polymer in terms of brittleness .
What is done a styrene butadiene rubber is used , where a rubber butadiene having a low T g it gives a rubbery domains in the copolymers and as a result this copolymer can becomes rubbery or elastomeric .
And these copolymers are typically synthesized by emulsion ionic polymerization , these copolymers with high styrene containing high amount of styrene can are used as a latex paint , where the styrene is cross - linked little bit with unsaturated di - carboxylic acid .
And to combine or to improve both the solvent resistance and in and the impact properties of styrene one very common approach is taken is a making a for the star polymer where you have acrilonitrile which improves the solvent resistance , butadiene will improve the impact properties and styrene which gives you the heat resistance properties .
So , this is a very commonly used polymer as a homo polymer as a as such or as blend with some other homo polymers by polystyrene and polycarbonate and others .
Styrene can be cross linked with small amount of divinyl benzeneum cross linker that will make cross linked spheres cross link product , which can be used as a packing material for the columns in size exclusion chromatography .
And the other examples of copolymers which are available commercial like ethylene vinyl acetate copolymer unsaturated polysters and so on .
The other examples , but I am not spending much time on discussing those applications here .
What we will do now we will move to the next polymerization method , which is a ring opening polymerization or in short R O P .
R O P by name as the name suggests it is a ring opening polymerization , so you have ring in monomer having ring structure and you polymerize it , and make a linear polymer .
Now , the feasibility of this polymerization from a ring to linear product linear monomer to polycyclic monomer to a linear product , like all other reactions depends both on thermodynamic and thermo dynamic and last kinetic factor .
We have discussed this thermodynamic factor earlier also while discussing in ring formation , cyclic formation instead both polymerization if you can recollect from about over a fifth or sixth lecture where we talked about the tendency of cyclic ring formation in state growth polymerization the same logic apply here the thermodynamic factor .
Now if you look the data compare so let us talk about the data .
And then we will can understand the thermodynamic factor in a more clearly .
Now , this are the data of all the 3 del g Gibbs free energy change enthalpy change and entropy change .
Now , I have made T del s to compare and put it in the same scale this is from cyclo alkane liquid cyclo alkane to linear crystalline polymers .
Now , when you are talking about cyclohexene these are basically we are talking about polyethylene these are polymers whether you start from a three member four member five member these all leads to polyethylene .
Now , these are these values here shown here these are all semi empirical values , they are not experimentally determined they are semi empirical values .
Now , if you look at the data as the ring size increases from 3 to 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 now the ring the lower number ring 3 and 4 member ring , they are quite highly strained 3 4 member are strained because of 1 angle strain if they are having high energy because of 1 angle strain .
Whereas , 5 member ring are strained due to eclipse confirmation and 7 8 member ring having also strained because of transformations .
Now , if you if you look at this numbers , the enthalpy change on the polymerization from a 3 membered cyclic ring to a linear polymer it is highly negative .
And if you just talk about linear polymers , what about first let us talk about del s now del s will be negative because the monomers are getting joined and making a linear , linear polymer .
Now , in if you talk about same molecular weight obviously if you have a larger ring , this number of monomers you require to make the same length of polymers .
So your del s would be less negative , your if your ring size is larger .
So , if you can and if you see that if your ring size increases your del s value is decreasing becoming less and less negative , but if you follow the del g value Gibbs free energy value and del h value they are almost having same trend .
So , basically the polymerization dictated mainly by the enthalpy change because 3 and 4 member ring are highly strained when they open up and polymerize and gives a lot of this energy , which was already which is getting released because of ring opening .
Similar also true for high , high rings with size of 7 , 8 carbon .
6 member ring is actually little higher than 0 , if you compare slightly higher than 0 .
Basically 6 member ring is not thermodynamically feasible the opening ring the opening polymerization of 6 member ring is not thermodynamically feasible .
So , basically now from this thermodynamic data we know that it is easy ring open polymerize easy to carry out ring opening polymerization on 3 , 4 member ring and say 7 ring .
5 member ring also will polymerize by ring opening method .
Whereas 6 member ring is not that feasible to or basically it is not feasible to polymerize thermodynamically .
However , can you make take a say 3 member ring or a 4 member ring or say 5 member ring .
Can you make polyethylene by this route this way , can you make polyethylene from either of this either of this by ring opening polymerization ?
The answer is no because it is not only determining by determined by thermodynamic feasibility , there has to be kinetic path way through which you can carry out the polymerization .
Basically this is saturated ring and there is no place where u can carry out a electrophilic or neutrophillic character by external and open the ring , and then carry out the polymerization .
So , this is this molecules even if they are thermo dynamically feasible they do not undergo polymerization .
So , what you need so you need a hetero atom in the ring in the cycling wave , which we have a ring like say ether molecule see this ether or a ester or say a amide they might can do there is if you use asilo base they can actually do nucleophilic or electrophilic attack on this ring and reopen .
And then which can react with another ring cyclic molecules and let the chin propagate .
So , what we basically need what we basically no that simple cyclic rings like cyclo pentain or cyclo butane they do not undergo reopening polymerization .
You require a ether atom , which will actually enabled electrophilic or a nucleophilic attack by external agents by which the rings will open .
And then start the propagation reaction and which will finally , lead to a polymer molecule .
So , the types of monomers we there is a there is a different structure where basically these are the types of monomer , you can do a re - opening polymerization .
So , basically all have a hetero atom in the ring , whether it is a or ester or amides whatever is the case .
Now , that actually enables a from external agents which will be open first and then propagate .
This is this will form and get poly posphogen , if you have a cyclic cyloxin molecule it open up to give you linear poly cyle oxide .
If You have a lactone give you poly ester if you have a lactum , it will cyclo lactum it will give you a linear poly amide molecules .
Now , the chart of the thermodynamic feasibility what we shown that was for ring cyclo alkenes not this type of monomers , where you have a hetero atom .
So , the absolute value in this graph will change , if we consider now a cyclic ring hetero atom or the teams remains more or less same .
So , again the strain of you know thermodynamic feasibility will decrease as you increase from c to c and then again go up if you increase the ring size .
So , basically if you have cyclic ethers say tetra hydro firen or a di oxine they do not undergo polymerization .
Whereas this actually undergo ring opening polymerization .
Now , let ’ s talk about few characteristics of a ring opening polymerization , and talk about the mechanism and kinetics of a ring opening polymerization .
Now , as we discussed if you have a cyclic ring here , then you need first to ring open the ring to open up and then start the propagation reaction .
Now , see here radical initiator see radical initiator , now it is unlikely that this will inter act or react with this and ring opening , that is not very feasible .
So , you either need a cation or a anion to sort of initiate a ring polymerization so initiation by… In case of ring opening polymerization the initiation is done by the same types of ionic initiators as in the case of ionic polymerization of carbon carbon double bonds .
We have discussed in length about cation polymerization or an anionic polymerization of carbon carbon double bond .
And those are the same types of initiators will be used to basically polymerize the cyclic rings and make a ring opening polymerization .
So , radicals radical initiator is not a basically feasible in terms of in case of ring opening polymerization .
Now , because we are talking about initiation by ionic initiator so you have those different types of species , covalent specious between the ion and counter ion with it present as a covalence specious or ion pair or free ion goes different types of association between the reaction center and the possible .
Hence there is tremendous effect of the solvent and the counters ion in case of ring opening polymerization as well , as was in the case of the linear ionic polymerization of the double bond .
Now , this is the chain polymerization that is interesting because the polymers you are making .
See if you have a lactum your opening up and making a polyester or you have a lactum you are opening up and making a poly amide .
Now , poly ester poly amides are typically synthesized we have discussed earlier they are synthesized by stiff polymerization , but in this case we are making the same types of polymers , which we knew till now that they are typically synthesized by step growth polymerization .
They can be synthesized by ring opening polymerization from the cyclic monomers as well , and the mechanism here is chain polymerization .
So , basically a propagating chain a chain propagates and the monomers get added and the chain ends .
So , the chain keep on propagating there is no reaction between two monomers or there is no reaction between two high molecular polymer chain as well .
The same as the chain polymerization and in because you are talking about ionic polymerization in most cases they are leaving and we know that bi molecular term is not possible for ionic polymerization .
If you take care of the reaction medium very well so that there is no impurities in these polymers that are leaving .
So , you can make block of polymers of functional polymers at the end of the reaction , and in this case unlike a linear polymerization of the vinyl molecules , polymerization de polymerization equilibrium is very important .
Now , one different this ring opening polymerization with the normal chain polymerization , we know is that the rate constant for propagation is in its several order of maginitude lower than normal chain polymerization , it is actually of same order like in case of step growth polymerization .
So , though this is a chain polymerization , but the reaction rate or the propagation rate constant is having much lower value compared to several order of magnitude growth in comparison to normal chain polymerization .
And the values are similar to the step growth polymerization values .
So , the reaction is slower compared to your normal chain polymerization and as you know that we discussed this most cases this are leaving .
So , the molecular weight of ring opening polymerization is dependent on the conversion .
So , higher the conversion the higher the molecular weight .
And also you can control the estimate or predict the molecular weight form the ration of monomer and the initiator as in the case of other leaving polymerization we know .
So , unlike step growth polymerization here you have control you can control the molecular weight by the ratio of monomer and initiator .
And like the step growth polymerization the molecule will depend upon the conversion , but in case of step growth the high molecules are only get high conversion .
But in case of ring opening you get slow increase in the molecular weight with the or the linear increase over the molecular weight with the conversion of monomer .
Now , examples of before we come to examples let ’ s talk about the mechanism part of how , what are the ways this ring opening polymerization done if we know this is ionic polymerization… So , let ’ s first talk about anionic R O P now the initiator is initiated by as I said same similar ionic initiators as in the case of linear chain anionic polymerization , like metal hydroxides alkoxides metal hydroxides or metal alkoxides or metal oxides etc .
Or like we discussed alkyl metal alkyl lithium or aryl metal you can use to initiate the anionic chain polymerization or radical anion also anionic species like sodium , naphthalene they also they are same types of initiator , as we talked about the our discussion on anionic chain polymerization .
Say you talk about say alkyl metal initiator you have a alkyl metal initiator , say I take a ethylene oxide .
Now , there is a nucleophilic attack by this initiator and the ring will open up .
So , you have this now this will again react with another monomer in similar way .
So , you can write the general you can increase the number of state and you will get a your polymerization .
Now , as I said that like other anionic polymerization this is a living polymerization .
So , this at the end of the reaction if remains like this you can add a second monomer and you can block a polymer .
If you want to terminate the reaction you can exchange these with a say adding some water or alcohol , and then you can exchange like other we discussed earlier .
Now , if we talk about a cationic ring opening polymerization .
Now , here typically its strong protonic acids like say tri floro acetic acid or say fluoro sulfonic acid or say triflic acid which are the way this , this are our acids which are very strong acid are required to initiate a ring opening polymerization .
Now , let us say have so this will say talk about now a 4 member ether , now in this case there is a nucleophilic atom of the oxygen to the proton and you get , you actually form secondary oxonium ion , in all this cases you have a counter end associated with that you this will react with another monomer and propagate in the chain .
So , can you make a polymer like this , this will form secondary oxomium ion this is , now we have been talking that we need a very a very strong acid because if you counter ion have sufficient acid is not that strong then this counter ion will have sufficient necleophillicity to either set up the oxonium ion or a proton and stop the reaction there itself .
So , for that you require very strong acids so that the necleophillicity of the counter ion will not be enough to compete with the addition of monomer or the reaction of monomer with the oxonium ion .
Similarly , if we have little bit of moisture present in the medium or if you have water molecules , then this will easily compete with your monomer with oxinium ion and then terminate the or disrupt the reaction immediately .
So , like earlier when you talk about cationic polymerization here also you need to have a very stringent requirement of so that you do not have a moisture , any moisture present in the system .
Now , other types of initiators we talked about the catalyst and co catalyst like B F 3 and H 2 O catalyst and other types can be also used in this cationic ring opening polymerization also .
At the end as a this will remain leaving the only thing in case of cationic polymerization , as you can imagine that if your chain is having…is a linear chain at the end you have a cationic group and anionic counter end then you can oxygen here , then it can do intra molecular reaction and form a linear molecule as a ring molecule .
Now , where it can also react with a another linear molecules and then stop this chain and form a sight in middle of another chain .
So , form there a branching can happen so this are the side reactions where chain transfer takes place intra molecularly with in the chain form a ring structure and another linear molecule .
Or if there are intra molecular chain transfer reaction happen then there will be possibility of in this case .
And this case also you want to stop the reaction , you can add agent through which by which it can external agents which will terminate the cationic chain .
Now , with this I think we have discussed the ring opening polymerization , now let ’ s talk about few examples of commercial reopening polymerization , this are the typical this are the polymers which are available commercially which are made by ring opening polymerization .
For example , poly ethylene oxide and poly proplyne oxide they are synthesized by anionic opening corresponding cyclic monomer of ethylene oxide , and propylene oxides .
Poly tera hydrofuran can be synthesized or the cationic ring opening polymerization of tetra hydro furan polyacetals are synthesized by cationic reopening polymerization of trioxane .
And as I gave examples of aliphatic polyesters from lactones and polyamides from lactones and this is also very common where linear poly siloxanes or silicons are synthesized by anionic or cationic polymers of cyclic siloxanes so with these we end our discussion of ring opening polymerization .
And in the next lecture we will start our discussion on stereo chemistry of polymerization and subsequently in other lecture , we will talk about coordination polymerization .
So , we will start stereo chemistry of polymers and polymerization process in our next lecture .
Today we will discuss two of those cases that do not represent the reaction velocity profile in terms of hyperbolic kinetics .
One of them is substrate inhibition the other is sigmoidal kinetics particularly as it applies to multisite and allosteric enzymes .
If you look into the reaction profile , a typical substrate verses initial reaction velocity profile , for a hyperbolic kinetics goes like this with an asymptotic reaction velocity Vm .
In the case of substrate inhibition the reaction velocity when you increase substrate concentration does not reach to a saturation level rather even earlier than that it deviates and passes through a maximum .
When substrate concentration goes high the reaction velocity starts dropping and does not retain saturation level .
On the other hand in the sigmoidal kinetics instead of a reaction profile being represented by rectangular hyperbola it is in the form of a sigma .
Ultimately it can reach the same kind of saturation behavior but the initial profile will be different in the case of a sigmoidal profile .
These two different situations will give you an idea , that in some cases and these are very important cases and have lot of physiological importance for the cell to have design such a enzyme which deviate from hyperbolic kinetics as we will see further .
Coming to the first case of substrate inhibition , the reaction profile passes through a maximum and at a particular substrate concentration it reaches a maximum value and then it starts dropping .
This substrate concentration corresponds to maximum reaction velocity .
This substrate concentration corresponding to maximum reaction velocity is not really something which is corresponding to maximum reaction velocity of enzyme catalyzed reaction .
It is as a result of certain enzyme substrate interactions such that the rate gets tapered even before the saturation level reaches .
This effect can also be visualized when you look for the classical Lineweaver plot .
Instead of giving you a straight line it becomes convexed to the x axis and it can meet .
That can give an indication that the enzyme catalyzed reaction is having some kind of a substrate .
There are number of examples in practice for such kind of a behavior in the reaction .
One of the most conventional and simplest examples could be hydrolysis of sucrose to glucose and fructose by invertase .
A very classical example , where at a substrate concentration of greater than 0.1M , 0.1M is not a very high substrate concentration , is about say 3.4 or 3.5 % .
Even at that level the effect of substrate concentration inhibition is noticed and the reaction velocity starts dropping .
Another example of substrate inhibition is in the form of succinic dehydrogenase which catalyzes the interconversion of succinate to fumerate , a reaction which catalyzes the formation of a double bond .
Succinate as a substrate has two carboxylic groups .
As per the normal function of the enzyme the two carboxylic groups of the substrate are required to be bound to the enzyme molecule .
When substrate concentration becomes very high , the possibility or the statistical feasibility of one carboxylic group from each of the two substrate molecule binding to the same enzyme molecule becomes much higher .
In that process when the two substrate molecules gets bound to one enzyme molecule and one carboxylic group of each of the substrate molecule then the reaction is not catalyzed and then ultimate enzyme substrate complex is a dead end complex .
The structure of succinic acid is - OOC - CH2 - CH2 - COO - .
As per the normal reaction of succinic dehydrogenase two carboxylic group of substrate molecule are required to be bound to the enzyme active sites and at low concentration of substrate this can very well happen .
When substrate concentration becomes very high the enzyme molecule might bind to two substrate molecules , one of the carboxylic groups from each of the succinic acids .
So therefore the active sites are not functional yet because instead of one molecule there are two molecules attached and the enzyme substrate complex so results in the form of dead end complex which doesn ’ t go into the final product forming stage .
For such a reaction there is a feasibility that you may end up in an enzyme molecule having such kind of a confirmation , instead of having the two carboxylic group of the same substrate molecule bound to the enzyme , there are two substrate molecules bound to the same enzyme and one carboxylic group of each of the substrate molecule and such a complex does not form the product .
Similarly in the case of hydrolysis of sucrose by invertase also by one of the possible mechanistic models when one substrate molecule binds , the enzyme substrate complex leads to a product formation .
If the enzyme is bound to two substrate molecule a dead end complex is formed .
A simple reaction mechanism can be expressed like E + S ES E + P + S ESS We can write exactly in our nomenclature of k1 , k - 1 , k2 and this equilibrium of the second substrate binding can be expressed by dissociation constant of Ks , individual rate constant being ks and k - s .
This ESS is a dead end complex .
That means the product formation will take place from the substrate complex .
This will not lead to any product formation and whatever fraction of the total enzyme is bound in the form of ESS will not participate in the reaction with the result that reaction velocity will drop .
That means at the saturation level you are assuming that the entire enzyme is bound to the substrate .
The entire enzyme is not bound to the substrate here .
Increasing the substrate concentration leads to more of ESS formation .
On the basis of equilibrium kinetics one can write the rate expression of such a system as Vi / Vm = S Km + S ( 1 + S / Ks ) The Vm is the true maximum reaction velocity if there was no such substrate inhibition to take place and Km is , the classical ( k - 1 + k2 / k1 ) , the Michaelis Menten constant and ks is the dissociation constant of the second substrate binding .
This can also be written as Vi = Vm S / Km + S + S2 / Ks If you plot such profile the rate expression will pass through maxima and if you differentiate that dv over ds and equate it to zero you will end up in maxima and the maximum reaction velocity will be obtained at substrate concentration which is Sm = vKm .
Ks One can develop the expression to write the differential and equate it to zero and that will end up in the substrate concentration for the maximum reaction velocity that is the maxima .
In such cases you notice that such enzymes do not really strictly follow the typical Michaelis Menten kinetics .
There are another group of enzymes which are multisite .
The chemical nature of the enzyme provides for a quaternary structure in some cases and the quaternary structure is composed of multiple subunits arranged in a particular fashion so that their interaction brings in the confirmation thereby active sites are created .
These multisite enzymes are alphabetic in nature which consists of more than one sub units and very often these subunits might be identical .
Each subunit may have an active site for enzyme catalyzed reaction , multiple active sites per enzyme molecule .
There are two kinds of situation one is that these active sites on these oligomeric enzymes might be identical and independent .
Notice the two terms which I have highlighted here .
Identical means the catalytic sites have identical free energy change of binding .
That means free energy of binding on either site is same and it does not matter to which site the substrate molecule binds first or second ; it makes no different .
They are identical in terms of confirmation .
The independent subunits or the independent binding site implies that binding to one site does not bring in any conformational change so as to change affinity of other binding sites .
Very often it might happen that initially the binding sites may be identical and they are free , free for the substrate to bind to any one of them .
Once the substrate binds to one of the binding sites in some cases the binding site might induce a conformational change thereby making the affinity of the substrate molecule to the other binding sites more favorable or some times unfavorable .
But when we talk of allosteric enzyme we are talking of a favorable interaction .
Multisite enzymes have identical , independent subunits .
In such cases when all the catalytic sites on the enzyme molecule , even look at its different subunits , if they are identical and non - interacting or non - cooperative , they have no interaction among each other .
The net result will be that you are handling something like if you consider that let us say one nano mole of an enzyme substrate concentration of n binding sites per mole will be equal to n pico mole of one binding site molecule .
The rate profile will be hyperbolic in nature .
The only difference is that the maximum reaction velocity term in that case will be n.K2.Et .
That means maximum reaction velocity in the case of single binding site is Vm = K2 E0 If there are n binding sites the only difference will be , it will become Vm = n .
K2 E0 because all the n binding sites have to be saturated .
Except for that difference there will be no difference and the reaction profile will be hyperbolic in nature and one can examine such a situation in the case of a variety of identical independent subunits .
Just to illustrate my point with the simple example of a dimer having two identical binding sites , the reaction mechanism can be written as ks k2 E + S ES E + P + + S S ks ks k2 ks 2 k2 P + E SE + S SES ES + P ( or ) SE + P In all the four cases of equilibrium , dissociation constant is ks which are identical .
That means all the binding sites are equal .
They don ’ t influence the binding to other site .
The first binding site is occupied , the second binding site is free and depending on substrate concentration it can bind and form a binary complex where the two substrate molecules are bind that means both the binding sites .
The only difference will be when SES gives you a product and the rate of product formation will be 2k2 because it will lead to ES + P and SE + P .
Similarly here also you can have a product formation to P + E .
You can have from either direction the product formation and they are independent .
Similar situation might arise for a tetramer or a hexamer depending on the number of binding sites on the enzyme molecule .
For such a simple case the rate expression can be written as V / Vm = S / ks + S2 / ks2 1 + 2S / Ks + S2 / ks2 Consider that the enzyme molecule has binding sites on both the sides , S and ES .
The only difference is S represents one active site and ES represents the other binding site that is occupied .
That means that whether it binds on left hand site or right hand site the binding of the next substrate on to the vacant site has no effect .
Both the binding sites can dissociate independently and lead to formation of a single enzyme substrate complex plus product .
That means all the seats in this class are totally vacant .
Anybody who gets into the room can occupy any of the seats and as many numbers of students can come in as long as they can occupy the number of seats available .
Only difference you must notice is Vm term will correspond to Vm = 2k2 .E0 rather than Es .
Eventually it will lead to that .
If suppose the entire enzyme SES is in this form , both these sites are totally saturated because ES and SE also will lead to the product formation .
The net effect will be that SES is giving you two products and the free enzyme .
The only difference is here the definition of Vm must be taken as 2K2 .E0 or in another words if it is a multimeric protein or enzyme where n binding sites are there , it can become n.K2.E0 Otherwise the treatment can be identical as in the case of a hyperbolic profile .
This in general you can write as V / Vm = S / Ks ( 1 + S / Ks ) n - 1 ( 1 + S / Ks ) n If you just extrapolate the number of binding sites from two to four to six to n , these are the kind of rate expression you end up .
This is equal to V / Vm = S / Ks = S / Ks + S ( 1 + S / Ks ) which is same as hyperbolic rate expression .
When there is n number of binding sites the only difference is that the definition of Vm will change.Rest of the rate profile will remain identical and there will be no difference .
In the second and more complex case when we talk of co - operative binding if you consider two binding sites on enzyme molecule they may be identical .
That means the free energy change for binding process may be the same .
That is what we mean by identical binding sites .
That means to start with the substrate molecule can hook up to any of them irrespective of the choice but after it gets bound it makes a conformational change on the enzyme molecule .
That means it influences the confirmation of the other binding sites therefore altering its affinity .
There are number of mechanistic hypothesis which have been proved .
We will come to that .
The first binding site is free for all the substrate molecule and once this is bound if it makes a change on the confirmation of the other binding sites such that the affinity of the substrate to the binding site gets altered , if you want a positive favorable effect , the affinity must increase or the Km value must decrease , dissociation constant must decrease .
If the km value of the subsequent binding sites decreases with the binding of the first substrate molecule we call it co - operative binding .
The significance of co - operative binding lies in actual practice in the case of allosteric enzymes .
All of you know probably with your background in the biochemical metabolism that with each metabolic path way you have certain regulatory enzymes which behave in allosteric manner .
By allosteric manner I mean that substrate binding process in case of those enzymes is co - operative in nature and they do not exhibit the typical hyperbolic kinetics rather they exhibit sigmoidal kinetics .
If you just compare the two kinds of profiles , this is a sigmoidal profile and this is the hyperbolic profile .
For two different enzymes which are coincidentally having the same velocity at substrate concentration let us say nine arbitrary units in both the cases whether it follows a hyperbolic kinetics or sigmoidal kinetics the enzyme velocity reaches the same value at a particular substrate concentration .
Only initial phase changes and the first one is typical hyperbolic profile , the second one is the sigmoidal profile which is exhibited by allosteric enzymes .
The allosteric behavior has in some way an advantageous situation for the regulatory enzymes to function .
The role of regulatory enzymes in a metabolic pathway is the control of metabolic pathway .
That means it should be able to switch on and off the path way with a very subtle change in substrate concentration .
These two profiles have identical reaction velocity at high substrate concentration .
For the two enzymes to act , in the early phases when substrate concentration increases from zero to three arbitrary units whatever are the units , in the case of sigmoidal kinetics the reaction velocity is only 0.1 in some arbitrary units .
Whereas in the case of a saturation kinetics or hyperbolic kinetics the reaction velocity can reach to almost 0.75 , 75 % of the saturation value , a very high level .
That means at a very small change of concentration , the reaction velocity can be very high .
On the other side if you take let us say two different substrate concentrations required for two different levels of activity to reach for example say between 0.75 and 0.1 , that is substrate concentration for reaction velocity to reach 0.75 and 0.1 .
In the case of saturation kinetics or hyperbolic kinetics the ratio of the concentration of substrates for the two levels to reach will be almost about twenty seven times .
That means at 0.1 , it can reach only at a very small substrate concentration here .
The ratio is twenty seven fold .
On the other hand in the case of sigmoidal kinetics this ratio is only 2.3 .
In the case of living cells the intercellular concentration of substrate does not change over a very large range .
There will be hardly any situation where a substrate concentration can change twenty seven fold or such a high level of change .
Whereas for control purposes it will require a very small concentration change by which the reaction velocity can be regulated and that is what can happen in the case of a sigmoidal kinetics .
That means just by changing concentration ratio of two to three fold you will notice that the reaction velocity can be altered from 0.1 to 0.75 and that is the advantage with this kind of reaction behavior the regulatory enzymes obtained in the case of cellular metabolism With this kind of a kinetic behavior the enzymes are able to act almost like an on and off switch .
That means if the substrate concentration comes down reaction velocity is very slow ; the metabolic pathway is slowed down ; it is not made to zero .
If the substrate concentration slightly increases the pathway is fully on and the product formation or whatever is corresponding intermediate in pathway are fully available and that advantage provides to the cellular metabolism .
Such a behavior of sigmoidal kinetics has been very appropriately explained at least by two mechanistic hypotheses .
One and probably in its simplest form is on the basis of sequential interaction model .
This is an extension of Koshland ’ s induced fit hypothesis which we discussed when we were talking about the specificity and how the enzymes obtain their specific action .
We talked about the Koshland ’ s induced fit hypothesis whereby when the substrate molecule binds to one of the binding sites the enzyme undergo a conformational change so as to fit on to the substrate molecule .
This is something like an extension to that and which means that when the substrate molecule binds on one of the binding sites of the enzyme it immediately triggers off a conformational change whereby the affinity for the next binding site becomes much higher and they expressed it with an interaction factor .
For each binding of the substrate to a binding site the affinity reduces by a factor let us say a , as interaction factor .
That is what you see in a diagrammatic picture like here .
If this is the free enzyme which has two binding sites , identical binding sites the substrate molecule binds first to let us say , A .
It immediately brings in a conformational change on the second binding site whereby the dissociation constant reduces to a Ks .
The conformational change leads to the dissociation constant or Michaelis Menten constant for the second binding site and then second binding site also gets bound .
It is logical that if this dissociation constant is low the substrate will have much more affinity for the second binding site .
Similarly if it initially binds with Ks on to other binding site it can influence the conformational change on the other binding site and it can meet .
Both the binding sites are occupied and such a system can be represented by a mechanistic model whereby you have the first binding as Ks either here or here .
The second binding process is represented by dissociation constant of a Ks either here or here .
The product formation with ES will be E + P .
Similarly when both the binding sites are occupied , the product formation rate will be twice the Kp because then it can go either to SE or ES , there is no difference .
In such a case you will ultimately end up with the kinetic equation or kinetic expression which will express the sigmoidal reaction velocity profile response .
The situation which I have shown here is rather too simplistic .
That means we have tried to explain with the two binding sites .
In many cases particularly with the regulatory enzymes , the number of binding sites may be four or six or eight even tetramers are a very common example in the literature and therefore the rate expression will be quite complex and their analysis can become difficult .
To simplify the situation there is an equation available corresponding to Michaelis Menten equation which can be applied to allosteric enzymes .
In the case of allosteric enzymes we have a simplified rate equation which can express or which can describe the rate behavior of the allosteric enzymes .
This was given by Hill .
One of the basic assumptions here which we made is that the interaction factors , what I mentioned earlier as Ks and a Ks , the ratio alpha is very , very small than one .
That means the co - operativity is very high .
Once a substrate molecule binds to one of the binding sites it makes a drastic conformational change so that the affinity is increased very significantly .
If you consider n binding sites what will happen in such a situation is that with each binding site being occupied by the substrate , the next subsequent binding sites will have much more affinity .
Ultimately at equilibrium or in steady state condition the net effect will be that the bulk of the enzyme will be in the form of ESS .
Theoretically at equilibrium the enzyme must be available in the form of E , ES , ES2 , …… , ESn .
Normally if there are n binding sites and the binding process continues sequentially then the enzyme must be available in different species in difference forms as E , ES , ES2 , up to ESn .
But if the interaction factor alpha is very , very small , at each stage affinity will increase by a very significant level or what we understand as co - operativity is very high .
In that case the assumption by Hill was that most of the enzyme will exist in the form of ESn .
There will be small concentrations but they can be neglected .
Based on that assumption then he gave a rate expression which is v / Vm = Sn / K ’ + Sn This is called Hills equation .
Here n is the number of binding sites per enzyme molecule and K ’ is the Hill ’ s constant .
This K ’ is different than the Michaelis Menten constant .
Michaelis Menten constant is the substrate concentration at which reaction velocity is 50 % of that of the maximum reaction velocity .
That situation will not apply here , if you analyze .
If you put n = 1 , then the equation will get into Michaelis Menten kinetics .
Vm here is the maximum reaction velocity when all the binding sites are occupied by the substrate .
The substrate concentration is high enough but again this is not identical to the Vm of the Michaelis Menten equation because Vm of the Michaelis Menten equation is an asymptotic value .
You can never approach it practically .
It is a theoretical value .
Whereas in this case of Vm , you can approach to that value when all the enzyme binding sites are totally occupied by the substrate molecule .
If you just take the same yardstick of explaining K ’ as we have taken in the case of Michaelis Menten equation , v = 0.5 Vm you will end up as Sn0.5 = K ’ in the case of Hill ’ s equation .
Or S0.5 substrate concentration for 50 % maximum reaction velocity is nvK ’ .
It was half of the maximum reaction velocity their .
So that brings in a distinction between the two parameters that we are talking about .
The level of s means the level of co - operativity for different enzymes as to how much it deviates from the hyperbolic performance or how much more efficient it is in terms of regulatory behavior .
When we talked about the ratio of two substrate concentration for two levels of reaction velocity the smaller it is , it is a better regulatory system .
Very sharp change in substrate concentration can bring in the regulation .
Similarly one can express the co - operativity index of any given allosteric enzyme by expressing it in terms of the ratio of substrate concentration for achieving two different levels of reaction velocity .
As conventional practice we take the two reaction velocity as 0.9 Vm and 0.1 Vm .
That means 10 % and 90 % and the ratio of the two , S0.9 / S0.1 is conventionally called as co - operativity index .
This is just a conventional practice .
You can define co - operativity index as long as you mention ; if it is S0.75 / S0.1 or S0.9 / S0.1 , or it could be any ratio .
It can be used to express co - operativity index .
It is only a matter of convention that we are following the ratio of 90 % and 10 % values .
If you just get the value of S0.9 and S0.1 you know original hills equation v / Vm = Sn / K ’ + Sn S0.9 = nv9 K ’ , S0.1 = nvK ’ / 9 and the co - operativity index will be nv81 .
Or in another words n will be equal to n = log81 / log S0.9 / S0.1 Therefore n is the number of binding sites .
If one can determine the value of S0.9 / S0.1ratio , one can determine the number of binding sites .
Number of binding sites , n theoretically should be an integer .
Number of binding sites will be one , four , two , three , five any integer .
But practically if you notice you will never get an integer value .
You will get a fraction say 3.4 or 3.6 .
The reason is the basic assumption in the hills equation is that the enzyme at equilibrium will be in the form of ESn whereas there will be small concentration of all other enzyme species .
That means with a partly substrate bound form and so therefore the final value of n will be in fraction .
As a matter of conventional practice if we get let us say 3.6 , we consider the next integer that is binding sites are four because the number of binding sites if we get less is primarily because of the other not completely saturated enzyme molecule .
If you want to plot this expression you get v / Vm = Sn / K ’ + Sn You can simplify this to get nlogS + log ( Vm - v ) / v = log K ’ log v / ( Vm - v ) = nlogS – log K ’ If you make a log log plot of log S verses log v / Vm - v , you must end up in a straight line with the slope of n and on log log plot you will straight get a slope and get the number of binding sites .
At a value of log S if you put v / Vm - v as one , the log format will be zero .
I am putting v / Vm - v as one and at that value the corresponding value of log S will be log S0.5 .
That means if you recall the log S0.5 what we deduced earlier from our equation was nlogS0.5 = log K ’ If you know the slope and determine the value of n and also determine log S0.5 that means substrate concentration for 50 % of maximum reaction velocity you can get the value of K ’ what is known commonly as Hill ’ s constant .
So that gives you a neat analytical procedure to define your kinetic behavior of the allosteric enzymes that are available in the living systems mostly for regulatory purposes .
Welcome back to this course on polymer chemistry .
We will continue our discussion on polymer molecular weight determination from our last class .
We had started the discussion on light scattering by which we can determine the weight average molecular weight of a polymer sample .
And then we will start the discussion on gel permeation chromatography on the later part of this lecture .
We will not finish this discussion on gel permeation chromatography in this lecture ; we will continue in the next lecture .
Now , this is where we left in the last lecture .
This is the equation based on the basic Rayleigh scattering equation and the fluctuation theories of Einstein and Smoluchowski ; and we explained the terms K c is the concentration in gram per unit volume ; delta R theta is the excess Rayleigh ratio , which is the Rayleigh ratio of the polymer molecules or the solute molecules in excess of the solvent molecules .
It is the second variant coefficient from which is related to polymer solvent interaction parameter and M is the molar mass .
Now , this expression becomes not useful or become erratic when the size of the solute molecule grows .
If the size goes , this equation is valid for isotropic scatterer which basically have dimension radius less than lambda dash by 20 ; lambda dash is the wavelength of the incident light in the solvent .
So , for those small molecules the excess Rayleigh ratio is does not depend on the theta is basically have same value for a different angles and we call this is isotropic scatterer ; remember , this we are talking about excess Rayleigh ratio not the scattering intensity .
Now , if the size of the solute molecule goes up and becomes sufficiently large so that radius is of the order of lambda dash by 20 .
For example , if we talking about laser having 633 nanometer wavelength then it is about say 15 or 30 nanometer ; we are talking about lambda dash by 20 ; or if you take a laser wavelength little lower at the beginning of the visible light then it will be around twenty nanometer .
So , it is basically these value depends the cut off value where this angular dependence starts depends upon the wavelength of the incident light which we are using .
Now , in this case the excess Rayleigh ratio is angle dependent and it has larger value or the highest value at 0 angle ; and as we increase the value of the scattering angle , the value for this excess Rayleigh ratio start decreasing .
Why does it happen ?
This happens , because if the size grows safe if you have a polymer molecule like this and this is in the solution .
Now , you have incident radiation coming and it is getting scattered from here , and it is going to the detector at 0 angle .
Similarly , there is another part also can scatter light and it is going to the detector .
Now , if this is detected at 0 angle there is no phase lag between two scattered radiations as they travelled the same distance .
So , basically there is no destructive interference at theta is equal to 0 .
But you have to consider these at an angle other than 0 ; for example , if I consider this theta then , because these two scattered light have a phase difference they will have a destructive interference between them .
Then as a result , i theta will be less than i theta equals to 0 .
So , scattering intensity will be lower or excess Rayleigh ratio will be lower in this case then what it was in case of theta equals to 0 .
Now , if you consider even higher theta value and you consider a theta like this which is higher than theta two then the phase difference between the two scattered light is even higher .
As a result , there will be more destructive interference between the scattered lights from different parts of the polymer molecules ; this scattered lights are from different parts of a polymer molecules .
So , this diminishing of the excess Rayleigh ratio at a higher angle than 0 is because of the destructive interference between the scattered light from different parts of same molecule or as a result of intra molecular destructive interference ; and the higher is the angle , the excess Rayleigh ratio becomes even smaller .
So , this shows what we explain in just now .
So , the same what is explained in a minute .
So , the angular variation of scattered light is directly related to the size of the molecule ; the larger is the size there will be more variation , because there will be more destructive interference because of the scattered light which is coming from intra molecular different regions ; and this starts around as I said lambda dash by 20 , it is starts this destructive .
So , see intensity of the scattered light actually becomes also proportional in addition to it become depend up on the molar mass , concentration and d n by d c square , it also depends up on the P theta which we call the form factor or angular scattering factor .
And P theta value is 1 at 0 theta equals to 0 , because you do not see any destructive interference and for all other angles P theta become less than one , and it becomes more and more small as we increase the theta .
So , at theta goes up , P theta goes down in value .
So , basically now by studying the angular variation of P theta we can get information about the size of the polymer molecules .
So , now , we modify the original equations for small point scatterer with a term P theta which is an angular scattering factor and as I said this becomes one for theta equals to 0 , and becomes less than 1 for any other value for theta .
And , Debye and Guinier actually established a relationship or deduced a relationship for equation for P theta for a mono dispersed Gaussian coil which is the case for a polymer coil ; P theta can be written like this where again the terms are self - explanatory ; s square is the radius of gyration ; this z is not there , maybe we can remove this z for time being .
So , for mono dispersed Gaussian current this is the equation where s square is the radius of gyration ; sometimes , it also written as R g square which is basically radius of gyration .
So , we can combine these two equations and we get this expression ; this covers the original scattering equation by Rayleigh and fluctuation theories of Einstein and Smoluchowski , and this is formed by Debye and Guinier which quantify the e theta term ; angular dependence term .
Now , this valid for dilute solution when no intermolecular interference and this also valid for low scattering angles which comes to an equation from like this .
So , finally , we have this expression and if we consider a poly dispersed polymer coil normally we have the polymer chains are not mono dispersed , they are poly dispersed .
It can be shown that this M is M w and this s square is s square z which is basically z average is radius of gyration .
So , this is the final equation ; we called this RGD model in the name of Rayleigh , Debye and Guinier for a poly dispersed polymer coil in dilute solution and this is valid for scattering at low angle .
Now , we have this equation .
Now , how to get more information with we can deduce from this .
I want to plot zimm and see what are the information we can get from this .
K c by R theta is a function of both c and theta .
So , now , we can plot this as a combined function of c and theta .
So , for that what we need to do in the experiment , we first need to get the R solvent for a dust free solvent .
First you get the Rayleigh ratio for only the pure solvent which must be completely dust free otherwise , the scattering from the dust molecules and which will give the enormous error in your measurements .
Then you make few dilute solutions , polymer solutions of frequent concentrations and say c 1 c 2 c 3 and so on , and get R solution for all these concentrations .
Now , once we get R solution , we have the value for R solvent which will give us the value for delta R and if we measure different angles which will give us the value for delta R theta .
We know the value for optical constant K , because all the terms remember the refractive index of the solvent molecule we need to get the d and d c value for the polymer molecules ; specifically refractive index increment for the molecules ; and we know the lambda and so N A , and so on .
So , we know the value for K ; and we know the concentration term here now delta I R theta .
So , we know almost everything ; what we need to know to construct a zimm plot ?
How do you construct a zimm plot ?
We plot K c by delta R theta as we said that this term is a function of both theta and concentration , we combine these two with a constant term this is arbitrarily chosen constant .
So , that we can free the data points or we can plot the data points well separated with each other .
So , we now have the measurements done for all the solutions at different angles .
So , we now plot the data for example , to detect for concentration c 1 and plot the points at different angles theta 1 theta 2 and theta 3 ; for simplicity we are just maintaining or just taking three data points in practically it should be many more angles .
So , that is for the first solution theta c 1 .
Similarly , we can do it for second concentration c 2 and get this value , get delta R theta excess Rayleigh ratio at different angles ; similarly , we get for the third solution .
So , here we are already showing for three concentration , but in practically there should be more concentration and we are only showing data for three angels .
So , that is your theta 1 , this is theta 2 and this is theta 3 .
So , we have three solutions with 3 data for 3 angles ; so , 9 data points .
Now , we extrapolate this data .
So , for a fixed theta we can extrapolate to c 1 equals to 0 , c is equal to zeros ; similarly , we can extrapolate theta 2 c is equal to 0 and theta 3 is equal to 0 , and also this value to theta is equal to 0 ; c 2 to theta is equal to 0 and this two again theta is equal to 0 .
So , this curve now is for theta is equals to 0 and this is for c equals to 0 .
So , this two points should match and this is the intercept K c by delta R theta as c is equal to 0 and theta equals to 0 .
Now , why we are doing this extrapolation ?
Why we extrapolate ?
This expression or scattering equations varied for very dilute solution , we ideally want the scattering intensity from one molecule .
So , to avoid or to eliminate any intermolecular scattering effect for that we are extrapolating c is equal to 0 and we want also eliminate any intermolecular scattering effect .
So , we want to extrapolate at 0 angle at 0 angle t theta will be 1 ; so , you can eliminate any intermolecular scattering effect and at c is equal to 0 , we can eliminate the intermolecular scattering effect all together .
So , now we have plotted all this data we know this intercept and we can get the slopes for c is equal to 0 line , and for this theta is equal to 0 line .
So , if you go back and look at this expression and just plot c is equal to 0 lines and theta equals to 0 line , and see what are the information we can get .
So , K c , the intercept ; c is equal to 0 and theta is equal to 0 should give you one ever weight average molecular .
So , this two intercept should match this line and this line in the same intercept .
So , that is one validation for data point and from the two straight lines one is c is equal to 0 straight line , another one is theta is equals to 0 straight lines .
So , slopes for these two straight line will give other information .
So , this is the expression for theta equals to c is equals to 0 .
So , if you put c is equal to 0 you get this expression and this slope of this line will be given by this is the measure of slope .
So , if we know M w , we can get slope of c is equal to 0 ; we get the value for S square z , z average radius of gyration .
Similarly , if we write the equation for theta equals to 0 line , we get this and if we only dealing with very dilute solution , and if you ignore this higher terms .
So , from the slope of theta equals to 0 line and making adjustment for K dash we can get A 2 from which we can get the values of polymer solvent interaction parameter .
So , what are the things we can get ?
We can get M w from the intercepts or intercepts for c is equal to 0 and theta equal to 0 , and we can get z average radius of gyration which can be converted to weight average radius of gyration , and we can get information of A 2 which will anyway give information about the polymer solvent interaction parameter .
So , this was first practiced by Bruno Zimm .
So , this is known as zimm plot ; this is very unique way of plotting this three dimension 3 d data into two dimensional using the help of a arbitrarily chosen constant and we can get this information from this zimm plot .
Now , coming to the experimental points , what are the experimental consideration we must do for this light scattering experiment ?
One is the solvent and the solute solution all the polymer solution should be absolutely dust free ; otherwise , the dust particles will scatter light that will interfere and give error in the your final result .
So , basically we do normally in the lab filter these 0.2 micron to say 0.545 micron filter to get rid of any dust or suspended particle is there .
Second , we need to do a calibration the detector is typically a molecular tube ; the output of the detector is proportional to the light intensity .
So , we need to convert the voltage output to the intensity .
So , we need calibration and calibration is typically done .
For toluene , it has a very high Rayleigh ratio and we need to purify .
So , toluene has high R value Rayleigh ratio and pure form easily available .
So , we use to calibrate the detector with the toluene .
So , if we know we can basically get the information about light intensity from the voltage output .
Number three , if we are using more than one detector , we have to do normalization of the detectors ; we got the detectors may be of different sensitivity ; we define sensitivity and they are having different scattering ; if they are placed at different angle then their scattering volume may be different and the scattered light may also refract .
So , for this reason we need to normalize the detector .
So , if you have several detector placed at different angles theta one , theta two , theta three and so on , we need to normalize the signal from this detector .
So , what we do ?
We take an isotropic scatterer and because we know isotropic scatterer the delta R theta is the angle independent .
So , delta R for isotropic scatterer is angle independent .
So , what we do is take an isotropic scatterer ; for example , say for organic solvent we can take a polystyrene about thirty K which is typically 5 nanometer ; for typically lasers this is less than lambda by 20 .
So , typically this will act as an isotropic scatterer and signals which we can normalize with a particular signal which is placed at 90 degree for an aqua solvent .
So , for aqua solvent we can use BSA which is aqua solvent typically have 2 nanometer dimension radius is 2 nanometer ; so , this is also again an isotropic scatterer .
So , we need to do calibration and then we need to do the normalization of the detector signals .
Fourth is we must do is accurately EPR solution .
So , that there is no error in the concentration values , because this is very important to know the concentration values and we need to get the accurate value d n by d c , and if this more important because the final expression have given by d c square term .
So , if there is error here which gets multiplied more in the final value of determined by M w .
We also know that the P theta value or P theta expression which we just showed it is for Gaussian coil or random coil which typically polymers are in common solvent , but if you anticipate that your polymers are stiff rod like or a very hard sphere like then you need to use the different expression for P theta and there should not be any aggregate formation even though using a very dilute solution you should make sure that especially this is very important for proteins and the other bio moleculars that no aggregation takes place .
T temperature of the solution must be fixed otherwise , you might get .
If you want to increase the sensitivity you can decrease the lambda , because the i theta is proportional to 1 over lambda 4 .
So , if you reduce the lambda then your sensitivity goes up ; the light scattering technique is not good for low molecular weights , because this i theta value for loads low molecular weights is very small , i theta is very small ; very difficult to detect and also d n by d c value for molecular is very low .
So , it is very difficult to accurately in the d n by d c value .
So , typically this technique is applied ; the lower limit is around the order of 10 to the power 4 to 10 to the power 5 ; this is the lower limit and the upper limit is given by this lambda by 2 .
Now , it is the lambda we are using , because what happened if the size of the scatterer or the polymer molecule or the other scatterer is very high and the respective interference between the scattered light from different part of the solute becomes so much that even at a little higher theta , this becomes 0 ; the value of P theta becomes 0 .
So , i theta becomes 0 .
So , it is very difficult to get accurate measurements of i theta for those cases .
In that case we need to get i theta value at very low theta to know or to find out accurate information .
So , basically upper limit for determination is becomes lambda dash by 2 where lambda dash is the wavelength of the light in that particular medium .
So , this is the conclusion or let us conclude the molecular weight determination by light scattering .
Now , as we said in the beginning , instead of light we can also use the small angle neutron scattering and small angle excess scattering get information about polymer solutions .
The same theory applies as in case of light scattering ; the expression K is the optical constant is different , because the case r different for different cases ; because the source of origin of scattering .
For light scattering , for LS , which difference in polarizibility of medium which causes the light to scatter .
So , K light scattering is proportional to d n by d c square ; whereas , for x - ray scattering , it is due to difference in the scattering is due to difference in electron density .
So , K x scattering is proportional to the difference in the electron density and for neutron this is the scattering is due to neutron scattering length density .
So , KNS would be proportional to length density .
So , depending up on which what is the origin for scattering for different electromagnetic radiation whether it is a light scattering or x - ray or neutron scattering ; the optical constant will be dependent on the difference in polarizibility or electron density and so on .
Now , x - ray is very small in compared to a visible light which is having 400 nanometer to 800 nanometer , it is about only 0.1 nanometer whereas , the neutron is about 0.1 nanometer to 2 nanometer .
So , remember the upper limit of the measurements where about lambda dash by 2 .
So , that was the upper limit .
So , for having any many useful information about this from this x - ray neutron scattering , the scatterer must be very small and what you need to do ?
You need to place or you need to measurements at very low theta typically less than 2 degree .
Now , if you want to get information or detect the scattering intensity at such low angle then you need to place your scatterer .
If this is 0 degree then if you want to measure a 2 degree then you need to place your scatterer at very large distance having found the scattering particle .
So , the path length between the scatterer and the detectors for this techniques is much longer .
So , basically you need huge equipments like which equipments where the distance between the scatterer or the sample cell and the detector is about say 1 meter to 40 meter range .
So , this is typically that is the difficulty in this technique .
So , very specialized equipment ’ s are made .
SAKS is commonly used for measuring sizes of dispersed phases in polymers and also it is suitable for getting polymer morphology ; whereas , SANS is basically we got the information about the radius of gyration , it can be used in bulk medium or bulk amorphous polymer .
So , with the help of sans it was observed that the radius of gyration in a bulk amorphous polymer is similar as in case of theta solvent ; so which was not possible to find out before the invention of this SANS technique ; SANS technique help us to get information ; both SANS and SAKS get information in solid sate or in amorphous bulk state from which will give us the information about the polymer chain the dimension in bulk state ; and if you compare the theta solvent , this is the first time after invention of SANS it was found that the dimension of polymer chains are similar in case of theta solvent and in amorphous bulk solution .
We just need to discuss that this techniques are quite good , but this light scattering techniques or the equipments are very costly .
And one thing if you look at this scattering factor P theta versus scattering angle ; now , if you have some approximate about you know length of the molecular weight of your polymer then you know how this polymer or how the scattering factor P theta will vary with scattering angle .
For example , if you dealing with a 100 K polystyrene molecules which typically we deal in lab , then look that P theta does not increases much with scattering angle .
The scattering angle decreases much with a P theta ; the scattering factor decreases much with the scattering angle when you have a large molecule where dimension is larger .
So , basically the polymers we deal in the lab sometimes we do not require detectors of so many angles may be one detectors at low angles could be sufficient for determination of the molecular weight .
Now , this is what we are discussing the static light scattering technique .
Now , in the beginning we said that we can also use the light scattering technique as dynamic light scattering which is also known as quasi elastic light scattering or sometime photo correlation spectroscopy .
So , here we detect the scattering from very small volume at very small time intervals ; this is what we do ; delta T which varies from microseconds to milliseconds and then correlate the scattering intensity fluctuations with time .
Now , how this scattering intensity fluctuation for say polymer molecule in solutions can be either from this Brownian motion of the polymer molecules which gives translational diffusion and also could be due to the conformational changes of the polymer molecule .
If this is the large molecule then conformation changes also may produce or the change the fluctuation in concentration which will give us the fluctuation in the scatter intensity .
Now , from this correlation we can get the information about z average diffused translational without going not going too much in the equations , we can just say that this correlation give us the information or the value of z average translation diffusion coefficient .
And this D z is equal to this quantity where K is the Boltzmann constant , T is the temperature , f 0 is we can get from stokes equation , 6 pie eta 0 R h where R h is the hydrodynamic volume ; perform this we can get if we know eta 0 and the temperature , and value of this from this dynamic light scattering correlation .
So , the information about R h hydrodynamic radius of the polymer molecules in solution can be obtained .
So , now , we discussed the various static light scattering techniques and we use of light scattering technique we can wet average molecular weight .
We can get also information about the polymer solvent interaction parameter and the radius of gyration , and with the help of dynamic light scattering we can get information about the hydrodynamic radius of the polymer molecules in a solvent for particular temperature .
Now , let us move to the next topic which is gel permeation chromatography , GPC .
Till now , we were discussing techniques which either can detect say viscosity average molecular weight or number average molecular weight , or the weight average molecular weight by themselves , but this methods were not enough to get the printed distribution of the polymer sample .
Now , this technique gel permeation chromatography in short GPC allows the measurements of entire molar mass distribution which enables us all the molecular averages to be computed which was not possible with the other techniques and we can use the GPC as the imperative techniques which we can use polymer per run , and then we can fractionate polymers according to their molecular weight .
GPC is also called SEC size exclusion chromatography , because we will know now itself that the principle behind the separation of this polymer molecules is based on the exclusion of size .
Now , this is apparatus of GPC gel permeation chromatography of solvent reservoir which pump the solvent through the columns .
Now , to have a steady flow , you might have a pulse dampener which gives the flow at a steady flow rate and you can have a filter which will filter the solvent .
So , that no dust particle goes in here you inject sample basically sample goes in the column you can have one or more columns connected in a series , and the polymer sample gets separated according to their size hydrodynamic volume in this columns , and when they come out you have a detector which detect the polymer molecules , and with the help of computer you can analyze this data .
So , basically in feasible you inject the polymer samples in a column which is consist of highly cross linked gel beads ; the beads are typically having diameter of 5 microns to 10 microns and they have definite pore size which can start from say for 10 to the power 100 Armstrong or 50 Armstrong to 10 to the power 5 Armstrong .
So , pore size might vary from very low to moderately high and they are packed with having beads of diameter of 5 micron to 10 micron .
These beads are pores with a pore size varies between say 50 Armstrong in to 10 to the power 5 Armstrong .
And the polymers gets separated in this column and then you can get detect the polymers using detectors concentration detectors like UV , IR or refractive index detector .
So , the principle is that you have pores in the column and the polymer molecules which are higher size they do not or cannot go inside this pores .
So , they come out fast and the polymers which have lower size they can go inside the pores which makes their path length which are longer compared to a higher sized polymer molecules ; and as a results they elute or come out column at a later time .
So , basically if you put a mixture of different size polymer in this case only two size is shown here ; may be big and small molecule .
Big one cannot go inside the pore so , will come out fast and the smaller one can go inside the pores , and which will take more time to come out ; obviously , polymers chains are also having a distribution .
So , it is not that all the pores are having same size , the pores size also have some distribution .
So , with the different pore size available and we always know that it is the polymers are not that distinct as this they are also having different size or different molecular weights .
So , with flow when this polymer mixture goes through the columns , the larger ones move faster ; as a result at the end of the column or end of the path , the larger ones come out earlier and you get the smaller ones come out later .
So , when the polymers come out you need to have a detectors which will detect and in most of the cases , because we want to get the concentration of the polymers which are coming out ; we usually use concentration detectors in GPC and most common use is refractive index detector ; and also in some cases we also UV visible spectrometer which basically is the polymer has some groups which absorb in visible region then we can get the concentration of polymer in that solution by UV visible spectroscopy .
Recently , evaporative mass is detector is getting popularity where the polymer solutions are evaporated and the scattering from the polymer globules are measured ; and we can also interrogative spectrometer , but it is not very common .
So , what we get ?
At the end of GPC experiment , we get a detector response and with the illusion volume .
So , the higher molecular weight or hydrodynamic size polymers will come out faster with lower illusion volume and the lower ones will come out later .
So , we get a detector response like this .
Now , what you need to covert this raw signal to typically how we represents a polymer distribution ?
Typically , we present a polymer distribution at weight fraction versus molecular weight .
So , we need to convert this to this type of expression .
So , that we can get a curve like this and we can get M n , M w and the other M z and so on from this curve .
We cannot get the value of M w , M n and other average molecular weights from this raw graph .
So , what we need to do ?
We need to convert this editor response to weight fraction of the polymer molecules and we need to convert the illusion volume to the polymer molecule weight .
So , let us stop here ; what we will do in the next lecture is to start from this curve and first we will know how to convert this detector response to weight fraction of the polymers and illusion volume to molecular weight , and then discuss about the different aspect of gel permeation chromatography , calibration and other experimental related things .
So , let us stop here and we will continue our discussion on gel permeation chromatography GPC or size exclusion chromatography in next lecture .
In our previous lecture , we had discussed some issues regarding the enzyme science particularly the sciences that are associated with the study of enzymes , the nomenclature of enzymes and key issues that relate to the importance of enzymes in the over all perspective of biotechnology .
Today we will be discussing some of the characteristic features of enzymes particularly as proteins and their chemical nature .
All of you may be aware that all the enzymes that are known so far are proteins in chemical nature .
When I say proteins we immediately understand a chain of amino acids .
Twenty different amino acids that are linked through peptide bonds and the size of the chain may extend some where from 100 amino acids to 300 amino acids in different enzymes .
They are macromolecules of different amino acids in a sense they are hetero macromolecules , hetero polymers ; that means the monomer units are not identical in nature .
They vary among the twenty different amino acids and their sequence and the number of amino acids or the relative concentration of each of the amino acid may determine the particular type of enzymes , its characteristic properties as well as its functional aspects .
As a macromolecule , we will notice that the properties of a macromolecule will largely depend upon the constituent monomers .
In the case of amino acids , they vary in terms of their various properties particularly ionic nature , their hydrophobic nature and their size .
There is large variation and therefore the relative proportion of these amino acids also influence the properties of the consequent macromolecule what we know as proteins .
Besides a macromolecule of various combinations of amino acids , the enzymes may also be considered as a catalyst .
When I say catalyst that means not all proteins will qualify to be called enzymes .
Only those proteins which have catalytic function , that means they can accelerate the rate of a particular reaction , can be termed as enzymes .
Proteins as you all may be aware have diverse functions in a living cell like structure , transport molecules , example - haemoglobin or myoglobin , defense molecules like antibodies and the fact remains that their more significant function in a living cell is catalytic .
Enzymes therefore can be termed as active proteins which have catalytic function in a living cell .
Alternatively some of the protein molecules which are known to be enzymes but may not be intrinsically catalytically active may require the role of an associated molecule what we term as cofactor for them to be catalytically active .
That means the protein molecule itself is not catalytically functional but in the presence of the cofactor the molecule may become a catalyst and may be considered as an enzyme .
These cofactors again could range from a small molecular weight organic molecule .
This may be required to be externally added like for example NAD , ATP , FAD or a variety of cofactor that you are familiar with in many of the bio chemical reactions or they could be or they could be as simple as metal ions and the fact that because in the absence of these cofactors the protein is not catalytically active , it implies that these cofactors have a very significant role in the catalytic mechanism which these molecules display .
Also these proteins may be very simple proteins for example a simple amino acid polymeric chain .
They could also be conjugated proteins .
By conjugated proteins we mean in addition to the amino acids the proteins chain will also be associated with some other non - amino acid molecules .
Very commonly encountered proteins are glycoproteins , many of the enzymes , particularly those which are isolated from eukaryotes , a glycoproteins which means that in addition to the amino acids the protein molecule is associated with an oligosaccharide , monosaccharide or an oligosaccharide , they could lipo proteins a lipid molecule , they could be nucleoproteins and a large number of proteins which are metalloproteins containing metal enzymes where the metal ions acts as a cofactor are known .
Another characteristic feature of these proteins as a constituent or as a chemical body of the enzyme is that in many cases there may be single chain of amino acids , a single chain protein and many of the industrial enzymes particularly hydrolytic enzymes are single chains which means that the backbone of the protein consists of only one polymeric chain and in many cases they could be even multimeric proteins that means more than one chain constitute the whole enzyme molecule .
A single chain is not functionally active .
The arrangement or the organization of the multiple chains could be two chains ; there could be three chains or four chains .
The organization of those chains provides certain natures which are responsible for the catalytic function and these multimeric chains or the multimeric proteins as some of you are familiar have a distinct role in regulatory aspect of the cellular metabolism .
As I was talking about the synthesis of the macromolecule the basic backbone of the protein chain in the case of a protein lies in the condensation of two different amino acids .
Here R1 and R2 indicate the distinction between two amino acids and the carboxylic group of one and amino group of other amino acid condense and form a - CONH bond which is known as peptide bond .
These peptide bonds have a resonance structure .
It has a very peculiar property which is really carried forward in the function and structure of the enzyme molecules .
This is the resonance structure and also the peptide units are rigid and planar in nature and the most important property which contributes to its secondary structure is the capability of free rotation about the alpha carbon and nitrogen and alpha carbon and carbon .
At these two sites they can freely rotate .
The bond can freely rotate and thereby can give rise to hydrogen bonding between the different amino acid residues in the chain and constitute the subsequent structural organization of the macromolecule .
The two major attributes of an enzyme molecule is the chemical nature of the protein and their catalytic function .
When we look at quantification of an enzyme molecule or enzyme sample or what we know as assay methods they also take into account these two major characteristics .
The quantification methods could be classified into two categories mainly or the two constituents could form the basis of assay methods .
One is based on the protein concentration that means an enzyme sample can be quantified on the basis of a protein sample .
That means what is the concentration of protein in a given sample and in terms of say milligram per liter .
One could determine by any method that is known to us and I will talk about it a little later .
The other way could be and which is probably more important for assay of an enzyme is its catalytic function .
That means you assay it or you determine its capability to carry out a biochemical reaction and represent its concentration in the form of initial reaction rate .
Any catalyst or any chemical reaction if you look at the reaction profile it can be indicated as between time and product formed and ultimately the rate of the reaction at duration dp / dt at the zero time will give you the initial reaction rate .
This initial reaction rate is considered one of the parameters for determining the concentration of any enzyme sample .
As a convention the quantity of enzyme which converts one micro mole of substrate into product per minute is termed as the rate .
Quantity of enzyme which can exhibit this kind of a rate , initial rate is termed as one international unit .
That is the conventional , internationally accepted unit of an enzyme activity .
One international unit of enzyme is the quantity of that enzyme or the concentration of that enzyme which can convert one micro mole of substrate into product in unit time per minute .
One macro mole of product formed per minute of the reaction can be considered as one international unit .
One of the limitations is that this is not a SI unit which is an internationally accepted system of units .
In the case of enzyme activity the SI unit is katal .
If we look into basic units of the international SI system , a katal in terms of rate terms will be the quantity of enzyme that produce one mole of product per second .
One mole of product per second is a very large unit .
If you make a comparison between the international unit and katal , katal is a very large unit and one katal could correspond to 106 x 60 international units because convert moles into macro moles and minutes into seconds .
A unit of katal is much larger and one can interconvert .
The initial reaction rate is the basic philosophy in determining the enzyme concentration .
On the other hand the protein concentration also gives us an idea of the amount of an enzyme present in a given sample .
Although it may not always be true if the protein is not in its functional form , it will loose its status of the enzyme .
It may remain as the protein .
But the importance of the protein concentration lies in the fact that it gives you an idea about the purity of the sample .
In case of mixture of proteins you can identify what proportion of the total protein is the enzyme molecule or what proportion of the total protein is the catalytically functional enzyme molecule and therefore protein concentration determination is important .
Whenever we analyze any given enzyme sample , we usually resort to both the basis : its initial reaction rate as well as protein concentration .
A large number of methods are used to determine protein concentration , as you may be familiar with , and all of them are linked or based on the native structure of protein , the constituent amino acids of a protein .
The most simple system probably you are familiar is by ultra violent absorption .
We determine the absorbance at 280 which gives you very precise information about the concentration of protein in the sample and this absorbance is based on the content of amino acid residues tyrosine and tryptophan in the protein which are more or less universally present in most of the enzyme samples .
One of the major limitations of this method is that it will have the interference or some kind of error involved if the impurities contain molecules that also absorb near this wave length .
Major contaminant in biological samples are nucleic acids which also have absorbance at about 260 nm and therefore sometime how to make an account of protein concentration taking in view the absorbance as a result of nucleic acid and very often the ?
280 - ?
260 with some appropriate factors are used to determine the absolute protein concentration in a given sample .
Another method which is very popular is Loury ’ s method which is based on the production of a blue purple color which absorbs maximum at 660nm with a sodium tungstate molybdenum phosphate reagent what we call as fallacy of call to the reagent which is usually a standard which is available and reagent is very accurate in the sense that you can monitor the protein concentration as low as ten milligram per litre .
A very accurate method which also has many other merits is in terms of lack of interference .
Another method is biuret method which is based on the reduction with alkaline Copper sulphate solution which contains sodium potassium tartrate and the cupric ions form a co - ordination complex with the amino groups or the - NH group present in the peptide bond .
The basic advantage here is that the method is based on the peptide bond which is very unique as far as the proteins are concerned .
The other polymers or other molecules present as contaminant will not contribute to error in the case of a biuret method .
Biuret method is based on the development of a blue color with an alkaline copper sulphate solution containing sodium potassium tartrate .
This cupric ions after reduction forms a co - ordination complex with the –NH group present in the peptide bond .
The specificity of this method is based on co - ordination complex formation with the peptide bond which is a unique property or a basic property in all proteins .
Unlike in the case of other methods which are based on tyrosine or tryptophan as residues , the relative concentration of these amino acids in the protein will give you a different reading .
But biuret reagent will give you a very uniform method in case of all proteins .
You have other methods which are based on dye binding or silver binding method where the protein can bind certain molecules and the binding is assayed quantitatively and expressed in terms of protein content .
But all these methods have a unique linkage or they have been standardized right from beginning in a more basic fundamental method what we know as Kjeldhal method .
The basis of Kjeldhal method is primarily estimation of nitrogen content .
Just like peptide bond , the nitrogen content is also intrinsic component of any protein .
You digest the protein sample with concentrated sulphuric acid in the presence of a catalyst .
Ammonia is produced and the ammonia then is absorbed into dilute acid solution which is titrated and the quantity of amino generated can be calculated .
There are minor modification in terms of automation and macronization of these methods which are available today commercially but the basis is to determine the nitrogen content in any given sample which gives you an estimate of crude protein in the sample .
It is assumed that any given protein contains approximately 16 % of nitrogen .
So if you multiply nitrogen content by 6.8 you get the net protein .
But it will be called crude protein in the sense that it will also measure all those molecules which contains nitrogen in addition to proteins .
But still it is one of the earliest methods that we had known and had been used .
So a very important aspect is assay which you should be very clear .
Another point which I like to highlight here before I proceed further is about the SI .
When we measure the effect of enzyme concentration with respect to initial reaction rate or reaction velocity the profile is linear at the small concentration range and then it tapers of in the large enzyme concentration range .
We must ensure that we are measuring our enzyme concentration in the linear range that means at low enzyme concentration level .
The best way to ensure such clarity is that instead of taking one sample we take at least two or three dilutions of the same sample which are let us say two fold , four fold , six fold , known dilutions and the final reaction rate which has been obtained must be proportional to the dilution .
Unless you get two different samples in the same linear range you cannot depend on the result because if you take a higher concentration of the enzyme you may be able to measure this reaction rate which is much lower than you would have got in a diluted sample .
One of the conventional ways is that we try to ensure that the reaction rate measured in the low dilution region or low concentration region can be easily measured by taking more than two samples of known dilution.The next important property of proteins is their ionic behavior .
This ionic behavior results from the monomer units that are present in the amino acid which are present in the macro molecule and when we consider a long protein chain bulk of the amino groups and the carboxylic groups in the amino chain will be involved in the formation of peptide bond .
It will be only the residual amino acids and the two ends one will have a carboxylic group and other will have an amino group free and both these groups will be free to ionize at any given pH .
Having both positive and negative group at the end will ensure that at any given pH the molecule will have some charge .
If you look at a very general system where I am assuming that all the R ’ s that are mentioned here are non - ionisable .
So we have only two groups with net positive charge .
At a low pH the molecule will act like a cation and as we increase the pH it will be negatively charged and it will behave like anion and some where in between there will be a zero net charge that means it will have both positive and negative charge of equal magnitude , what we call as zwitterion in the case of amino acids .
That will entirely depend on the pka value of the two charges .
It will not be at pH 7 .
It will depend upon the pka value of the two .
That means the negative logarithm of the dissociation constant of the two charges .
The situation is a simplified situation where we are assuming that only two terminal amino acids are ionized .
It will always happen that it will have residues like for an example these R ’ s which are also ionisable and the system might become a little more complex .
For example consider a protein chain in which you have amino acid like aspartic acid .
It has two carboxylic groups instead of only an amino group .
It has an additional carboxylic group .
At low pH , again similarly here it will have only one net positive charge , amino group will be ionized .
As we move further , increase the pH it will have one carboxylic and one amino group ionized .
When the pH is increased to a level where both the negative ions are ionized and the amino group is not ionized and ultimately you will also meet here a situation where you have zwitterions where one amino group and one carboxylic group are ionized , the other carboxylic group is non - ionized and that is a status .
This carboxylic group may be different than your amino group or the carboxylic group known .
A similar situation will be in the case of lysine for example when you have more than one basic amino group .
Some of the ionisable groups found in proteins are not only aspartic acid and lysine or glutamic acid that contribute to the ionization state of a protein .
There are other amino acids particularly like histidine or cystine or tyrosine .
They also play a role in ionization and they also have ionization behavior and their approximate pKa values are indicated here .
The net charge in the protein will depend on ionization state at a given pH of all the contributing proteins in the system .
That is a very important property which we must keep in mind when we look at enzymes for a variety of functions .
Whether it is a catalytic function , whether it is a purification of enzyme protein the ionic behavior plays a very key role .
That will depend entirely on pH .
For example you look at let us see the approximate pKa values .
For the C - terminal alpha carboxylic group the pKa is three and for the aspartic acid beta carboxylic group , the pKa is 3.9 .
It is because it is linked to another carbonate which is not in the basic chain .
The pKa is different and ionization will totally depend on the pKa value of the functional group .
Usually yes but it cannot be cited as a rule .
The nature of amino acid has a very important role to play in the conformation .
One of the important aspects is that unlike synthetic macromolecules which we are familiar in our day to day life say polythene or styrene they are all linear chain molecules , long linear chain molecules , hydrocarbon residue of monomers .
In the case of proteins the beauty lies in that it is a very highly folded molecule .
That means its volume is very much conserved .
The molecule is very compact .
It is not extended like a rod .
Not that there are no proteins which are not in the extended form .
Many of the structural proteins will be in the extended form but most of the proteins which constitute enzymes are globular proteins and they form almost a spherical shape under ideal condition .
But usually they will be in the ellipsoid kind of the situation where you can determine the conformation by their minor and major axis .
In fact there are relationships available where many of the hydrodynamic and transport properties of these polymers solutions can be related to the major and minor axis of the ellipsoid particle and these are broadly the methods which are used in general to determine the dimensions of the protein molecule or the nature of conformation , if suppose we know about the native conformation , we know the dimensions and after certain treatment if the dimensions are altered we tend to understand that they have under gone a conformational change .
These conformations are the result of the nature of the amino acids , the side chains of the amino acids , the principle functional group .
The principle interactions that are present in the case of any given protein or that applies to an enzyme are peptide bonds .
They form the backbone of the total protein chain but the conformation is a result of a number of non covalent interactions .
Most important non covalent interaction which involves in the conformation of the protein molecule is hydrogen bonds , very large number of hydrogen bonds .
Individually they may not be very strong in terms of bond energy but collectively in terms of number of bonds present they provide a very stable structure to a molecule .
The hydrogen bonds are attractive forces between a hydrogen atom attached to an electro negative atom .
That means the electro negative oxygen atom of the carbonyl group is attached to the hydrogen of - NH group .
This kind of a bond particularly between different peptide bonds can create a hydrogen bond and a large number of these bonds are present in any given molecule .
The next important interaction , non - covalent interaction is electrostatic force .
I mentioned that the molecule will consist of a number of ionisable amino acid residues and these ionisable amino acid residues might have molecules at a distance having positive and negative charges and when they interact they might exhibit the an electro static interactions and provide stability to the molecule .
Vander Waal forces the attractive forces resulting from favorable interaction between dipoles is a very important component in the conformation of a protein .
Hydrophobic forces are very often considered to be a major force which is involved in the globular structure .
Because of the nature of certain non - polar side chains to drift away from the water molecule , which in the case of an enzyme solution is usually water , it causes the non polar side chains to burry inside the core .
That means when you consider the wet side , on the surface there will be most of the charged groups and most of the non polar side chains will be located inside the three dimensional molecules .
It doesn ’ t mean that on the surface there are no hydro phobic patches .
Most enzymes will have certain hydrophobic patches on the surface which are required for many functional purposes because many of the interfacial actions will involve the hydrophobic patches on the surface and have an important role on the functional aspect .
Another covalent bond , disulphide bonds which have an importance in the case of stability of these conformation are the oxidation of cystein residues .
Two cystein residues oxidize to give S - S bond and that can come at different points in the chain .
After the folding is over , two cystein residues can join together to form a sulphydryl and thereby provide a stability to the conformation .
The conformation resulting from the forces of these interactions that take place are usually classified into four categories .
The simplest and the primary structure is the sequence and the content of different amino acids present in an enzyme sample .
Both the content and the sequence will vary from enzyme to enzyme .
There are no similarities except that there will be some homologies of the sequence of different amino acids in same nature of functional enzymes .
Then this chain can fold itself locally in the shape of either an alpha helix or a pleated sheet so as to give a secondary structure .
If you look at secondary structure in the form of a right handed alpha helix , the helix moves upwards and basically their structure results from the formation of hydrogen bonding between the peptide bonds .
A hydrogen bond is formed between the - NH group and the - C0 group in the chain at a distance by four amino acid residues .
That means the folding of the polypeptide chain into an alpha helix results with hydrogen bonding between the –NH and - CO residues located at the distance and this interaction results in a very smooth and regular dimensions of the chain in the case of alpha helix .
That mean the distances between these two turns is about 0.54 nm per turn 3.6 amino acid residues going to 0.5 and these dimensions have been extended over a large number of proteins and are found to be uniform .
When the protein molecule gets folded into a secondary structure of alpha helix , the side chains of the amino acids are projected outwards like a rotatory form .
The side chains are also free to interact with each other and provide you electrostatic interactions and other features .
This alpha helix and other type of conformation which many proteins will have will be again as the result of hydrogen bonding will be in the form of beta pleated sheet .
They can be parallel or anti parallel .
The hydrogen bonding between two sections of the polypeptide chain can form beta pleated sheet and because the poly peptide chain has polarity , either parallel or anti parallel , beta sheet can be formed and you come across in any given protein sample the alpha helix as well as beta pleated sheet structures very commonly .
After these secondary structures are formed again the molecule as the result of Vander waal forces and electrostatic interactions force into a compact globular molecule .
In the top figure different shapes indicate different amino acids and the linear chain of that is termed as primary structure .
The folding of these polypeptide chains into alpha helix or the alternative could be the beta pleated sheets , the secondary structure .
This structure again folds itself into a globular form as a result of disulphide bridges .
In electro static interactions also hydrogen bonding and Vander Waal interactions forces into a globular mass and the basis of that ultimately leads to minimum energy level because at the minimum energy level it will be stable .
Any deviation from the minimum energy level will lead to its denaturation or inactivation of the catalytic function of the enzyme sample .
When I use the term denaturation , the term denaturation does not in any sway consider the break down of the covalent bonds .
That is the basic backbone of the peptide bond .
The disruption of the non covalent interaction is good enough to lead to denaturation .
In a destructive way you can also break the peptide bond but then you will be destroying the protein itself .
But the destruction of or disruption of non - covalent bonds , non - covalent interactions will retain the protein molecule but we lose only the catalytic activity , catalytic function and that is what is the usual meaning of denaturation .
The globular form of the folded protein is termed tertiary structure .
Many proteins may be oligomeric proteins that means they may consist of more than one chain and the arrangement of these chains into a particular fashion so that they are able to bring about certain catalytically active sites is called quaternary structure .
The quaternary structure is only applicable if the enzyme protein consists of more than one chain .
In case of a single chain enzyme the quaternary structure question doesn ’ t arise but possible in the case of a multimeric enzyme or what we call as oligomeric enzyme .
The quaternary structure could be a dimmer , it could be trimer , it could be a tetramer depending on the number of chains present and the organization will really lead to the final conformation .
I was talking about the formation of sulphydryl bridge .
The two cysteine molecules can undergo oxidation to give you cystine molecule which acts as bridges and these bridges is very strong contributor to the stability of the protein molecule in its tertiary structure .
Whenever we look into any method particularly the protein engineering methods we tend to increase the number of sulphydryl bridges .
Because ultimately if we can have more sulphydryl bridges , it is likely to result into higher stability or in other words most of the enzyme samples which are obtained from thermophiles that means the organisms that can survive in the extreme temperatures will contain higher content of sulphydryl bridges and they are probably the features that results into the higher stability .
The other issue a very general issue about the feature of enzymes and proteins is the bio synthesis and regulation .
The biosynthesis of enzymes in any living system is exactly the same as biosynthesis of any protein .
The central dogma of molecular biology covers the biosynthesis of enzymes and proteins .
The enzyme in many cases , particularly the oligomeric enzymes have to undergo some modification .
There are certain organizational changes that lead to enzymatic protein or enzymatic constituent but otherwise the synthesis of the protein that leads to enzyme synthesis is identical .
The whole set of information about the synthesis of a protein is coded in the DNA molecule .
That means the sequence of nucleotides in a DNA determines the amino acid composition of a protein and that particular portion of DNA gets replicated , transcripted to mRNA and other forms of RNA and then translation of ribosomes to protein .
These are the steps for protein synthesis and in case of enzyme synthesis also the same principle applies .
As far as the regulation of enzyme synthesis is concerned most of the enzymes are regulated entities .
Most of the hydrolytic enzymes are regulated by the mechanisms commonly known as induction or repression or catabolic repression .
That means the structural gene of the particular protein is bound to a repressor molecule and unless an inducer is added it cannot be relieved .
The famous Jacob - Monod model , the Lac - Operon model was the one earliest study as far as the regulation of proteins are concerned and induction is a very common tool for regulation of the enzyme synthesis .
Most of the inducers for many enzymes very often are the substrate molecules themselves .
If you consider a glucose isomerase it is a xylose isomerase .
There are a lot of structural similarities with xylose and glucose .
Xylose is the inducer .
In the case of cellulase for example the cellulose act as an inducer and for many of the hydrolytic enzymes which are regulated by induction the substrate itself act as an inducer .
Then they also undergo catabolic repression that means the availability of an easily assimilable carbon source and the most easily assimilable is glucose represses the synthesis of the enzyme .
Various other mechanism of ……… and all that will also a play a role in the regulation of the enzyme synthesis .
Another important feature of a regulation here besides biosynthesis , is regulation of the enzyme activity itself .
Most of the enzymes are known to have a mechanism by which even their activity can be regulated not only at the biosynthesis level but at the functional level .
That means there are inhibitors and activator molecule which we normally know as effector molecules which can influence the initial reaction rate of the enzyme in the …… .
If you add along with the enzyme sample a known inhibitor molecule the reaction rate which is obtained will be much lower .
Similarly an activator molecule will increase the reaction rate and that is a very common feature of the regulation of enzyme activity and which is of significance even for commercial applications .
Another property of the enzymes in terms of proteins is their solubility .
All the globular proteins are known to be soluble in aqueous medium and so are the enzymes .
The solubility is enhanced by the formation of weak ionic interactions and the hydrogen bonds between solute molecules and water and the protein molecule has a large number of charged amino acids which can contribute to the ionic interactions with the solvent and also formation of hydrogen bonds with the water molecule .
Usually the solubility can be influenced by salt concentration that means ionic strength , the pH , the organic content in the solvent that means addition of a polymer , an organic polymer can affect the solubility and temperature is a universal parameter which influences solubility .
But you will notice that at least the first three parameters are very commonly used parameters for even isolation of an enzyme sample from a crude protein sample .
Finally to conclude I would like to say that today we have discussed the characteristic features of enzymes that are attributed by proteins nature , as a macromolecule in terms of assay method , their ionic behavior , their conformation , solubility and the role these properties play in the various techniques that are used for isolation , purification or application of these enzymes .
Quaternary structure has relevance in the case of oligomeric proteins that means the proteins that consist of more than one polypeptide chain .
The arrangement of these polypeptide chains into a particular formation can result in certain interaction which can form catalytic sites .
The arrangement of different polypeptide chains in an oligomeric protein is termed as quaternary .
In fact each chain will have its known tertiary structure and then these globular structures will assemble in a format .
Example is lactate dehydrogenase which is a tetramer consisting of four polypeptide chains .
Slight shift in these individual units can totally change the functional behavior of the enzyme .
This has led to one of the diagnostic method particularly for the patients who are suffering from cardiac problems the lactate dehydrogenase from the heart muscles undergo the quaternary structural change .
And the change in quaternary structure is related to the disease behavior .
That is one of the diagnostic tools .
So in fact even the conformational aspects are important for the applications .
